URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/does-trump-have-an-iran-deal
Title: 🌍 Does Trump have an Iran deal?
Date: 2026-05-24

Today’s briefing:
— Does Trump have an Iran deal?
— Why Sweden is angry at France
— Why China banned this documentary
Sponsored by:
Your Insider’s briefing:
— Does Trump have an Iran deal?
— Why Sweden is angry at France
— Why China banned this documentary
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. There’s a dash of trepidation each time I pull the trigger on a briefing to all 160k+ of you, as I’ve now learned anything can happen. Eg:
When we reported the US Supreme Court’s recent ruling against President Trump’s tariffs, we then heard from a lead plaintiff who happens to be an Intriguer.
And after we explored the wild Honduras-Gate story last week, it somehow led to me making my debut on Australian national radio over the weekend.
So it’s with that familiar dash of nerve-citement that I hit send on today’s briefing on what — and we cannot stress this enough — is up with this
“
largely negotiated
”
-but-
"inconsistent with reality"
US-Iran deal
.
Managing Editor
Jeremy Dicker
🎧 Prefer this briefing via
podcast
?
Become an Intrigue Insider today
!
Number of the day
44.8
That’s the University of Michigan’s influential consumer sentiment index, a record low since the survey began back in the 1950s. Wartime gas prices and cost-of-living angst seem to be hitting American household confidence even as stocks hit new highs.
Schrödinger's deal
Something seemed up when President Trump hit the weekend via an
announcement
he'd have to miss his own son's Bahamas wedding because "
I have a thing called Iran
".
Imagine getting that RSVP via
evite.com
?
Then sure enough by Saturday, oil prices plunged 5% and S&P500 futures got a nice lil' 1% bump, after Trump
announced
a US-Iran framework was now "
largely negotiated
".
But before the president had even kicked off his victory lap, Iran's regime was
pouring ice-cold chai
on his claims,
framing
(
🇮🇷
) them as "
inconsistent with reality
".
So again…
what
— and we cannot stress this enough —
is going on?
Trump variously claims
Iran's regime is pledging to
a
) not pursue nukes,
b
) pause enrichment, and
c
) deal with the uranium it already enriched (up to 20x civilian needs!).
Trump (or his team) argues the regime will then get phased and limited sanctions relief in exchange for each verifiable step above.
But speaking of Iran's regime...
the mullahs are claiming…
a
) Any deal is really focused on
ending the war
rather than a grand accord
b
) It'll also end the war between Israel and
Hezbollah
over in Lebanon
c
) Any re-opened
Hormuz
will still remain fully under Iranian control
d
) Phased
sanctions
relief will start
immediately
from phase one, and
e
) This MOU won't include any
nuclear
details (all deferred to future talks)
So...
what exactly
do
these two old foes agree on?
Basically just that
i
) there are real talks, and
ii
) an initial 30-day phase-one would entail some kind of Hormuz re-opening.
But beyond that, the much
bigger list of unknowns
includes some key wrinkles like...
Nukes
: the only Iranian official
claiming
Iran is “
ready to assure the world that it is not seeking nuclear weapons
” is President Pezeshkian, who has about as much influence over the regime as we do — recall the IRGC even called him an idiot?
And even his assurances are based on the old supreme leader’s
anti-nukes fatwa
(religious ruling), which
a
) never appeared in writing,
b
) had an unclear date, and
c
) is subject to '
maslahat-e nezam
' (theological flexibility for regime expediency). So you've got to wonder if it's an iron-clad rule or just
tactical fiction for gullible Westerners
.
But let's say there's some credible
no-nukes
pledge coming, the
technical details ahead are then epic
: Iran's enrichment pause is… for how long, verified how, and by whom? And that steaming pile of highly-enriched uranium just gets inspected? Or diluted? Or sent abroad… where? (the new ayatollah is ruling out that third option).
Absent any of those nuclear details (which took Trump’s predecessors
years
to lock down) it'll be hard to get much clarity on Iran's mooted
sanctions
relief.
And then there's all
the silence
on thorny issues like Iran's
missiles and proxies
(Hamas, Hezbollah, the Houthis) — aka Iran's twin pillars of what nerds call asymmetric deterrence ("
we dare you to attack us again
") and strategic depth (“
let’s fight at your place, not ours
”). The regime has always rejected any notion of abandoning
either
.
So with many key details still way up in the air — and grumbles even among Trump’s own senators (eg
Graham
,
Cruz
) — the US president has just
tweeted
there's no rush, and "
if I make a deal with Iran, it will be a good and proper one, not like the one made by Obama
".
Intrigue’s Take
There’s a great story doing the rounds that when the US president tried to pair these Iran talks with more Arab states recognising Israel via his Abraham Accords, he was met with…
Intrigue's Take · Insiders Only
To get full access to our experienced, unfiltered takes on what the news really means and what's coming next, become an Intrigue Insider!
Plus:
✓
Ad-free reading
✓
Daily audio edition
✓
Telegram community
Start Free Trial →
$79/yr · 7 days free
Intrigue’s Take
There’s a great story doing the rounds that when the US president tried to pair these Iran talks with more Arab states recognising Israel via his Abraham Accords, he was met with stunned silence, before joking to Gulf leaders, "
are you guys still on the line?
"
We mention it because it matches our instinct that both sides are still really
buying time more than making peace
here:
President Trump
can’t afford to own a long war nor a weak deal for November’s critical mid-terms, so the (unlikely) prospect of bundling in some Abraham Accord news could be a way to re-package it all as a historic breakthrough
Iran’s regime
desperately needs sanctions relief and oil revenues to finance its own grip on power longer term, but has already shown an ability to absorb every US-Israeli blow rather than relinquish its leverage (nuclear, proxies, missiles), and…
The Gulf states
are in a world of pain now their ‘safe hub’ brand has taken a hit, but any re-opening will be a bitter pill if it’s paired with an angry, wounded, and emboldened regime still backing proxies, making missiles, and tolling their Strait.
So right now (and we stress it’s early days, with limited info), this still looks more like a heavily-conditioned ceasefire
dressed up for the headlines
. The real test will be what (if anything) gets nailed down by that 60-day phase-two mark, if we even get that far.
History suggests the mullahs
can
be flexible on the shape of their nuclear program, but even if the US can now get them accepting verifiable removal of
98%
of the regime’s stockpiles, paired with
long
-
term
enrichment caps, that only gets us back towards the Obama-era JCPOA that Trump 1.0 famously abandoned.
Sound even smarter:
President Trump jointly briefed several Gulf and Muslim state leaders over the weekend and says they’re on-board, though none have commented publicly.
Israel’s Netanyahu got a separate briefing (most on the above call don’t recognise Israel), and he’s
issued
cautious support while reiterating “
any final agreement with Iran must eliminate the nuclear danger. That means dismantling Iran’s nuclear enrichment sites and removing its enriched nuclear material from its territory.”
Today’s briefing is sponsored by
Mulga Defense Corporation
Co-founders Ben Duncan, Jai Gabbard (outgoing US spymaster Tulsi's brother!), and Stuart Clout.
When Iranian drones hit AWS data centers last month
, they exposed the vulnerability of centralized cloud infrastructure - in real time, during active conflict. Mission-critical software went dark while militaries and enterprises scrambled.
Mulga Defense Corporation is fixing that
.
Their sovereign edge platform (Mulga Spinifex) lets you run full AWS-compatible cloud workloads (apps & AI) on localised edge compute meaning your apps & AI still work in denied, disconnected, and forward-deployed environments.
No cloud dependency. No single point of failure.
Led by serial founders with a proven track record of big exits, this is
a rare shot at the next Anduril-scale defense company.
$10M seed round closing this weekend.
Don’t miss out!
[
👋
Prefer ad-free reading?
Sign-up to Intrigue Insiders today
!]
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇨🇩
DR CONGO — Ebola update.
With DR Congo’s suspected Ebola cases now surpassing 900 (likely under-counting), aid cuts and distrust in government are complicating the medical response in rural mining towns — at least two health clinics have faced community violence. Meanwhile, Oxford scientists say they could have a vaccine within months. (
NPR
)
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES — Gabbard out.
Trump 2.0 spymaster Tulsi Gabbard has announced she’ll depart end of June, citing her husband’s cancer diagnosis. Her deputy, former CIA operative and analyst Aaron Lukas, will step in as an interim replacement. (
Reuters
)
Comment
:
The rumour-mill is suggesting her non-interventionist vibes either
a
) got her pushed out by an interventionist White House, or
b
) just motivated her to leave.
🇵🇰
PAKISTAN — Train attack.
The separatist ‘Baloch Liberation Army’ has claimed responsibility for the bombing of a train carrying security personnel, leaving at least 23 dead. (
Guardian
)
Comment
: We explored this long-simmering conflict
here
.
🇰🇿
KAZAKHSTAN — Nuclear delay incoming.
Russia’s Rosatom state nuclear agency has asked for at least another full year’s delay on Kazakhstan’s first nuclear plant at Lake Balkhash, blaming financing headaches from Western sanctions. (
EurasiaNet
)
Comment
: The fact President Tokayev just hosted Tokyo’s governor (Koike) for energy and tech talks suggests the Kazakhs aren’t leaving all their eggs in one Russian basket.
🇨🇳
CHINA — Easy does it.
China’s State Council has issued guidelines that remove key hukou (household registration) barriers for roughly 300 million rural migrant workers! It means they can now enrol in social insurance — and get easier access to schooling, housing, healthcare — where they work rather than at their registered birthplace. (
SCMP
)
Comment
: Framed as “people-centred urbanisation”, this historic move aims to boost domestic consumption and labour mobility amid slowing growth. But the question is how enthusiastically city governments will implement it without extra funding. Meanwhile, authorities have launched an investigation into Friday’s coal mine explosion, which left over 80 dead in Shanxi amid familiar alleged safety lapses.
🇿🇦
SOUTH AFRICA — Regional huddle.
Foreign ministers from the 16-country SADC regional bloc (South Africa, Angola, Zimbabwe, DRC and others) just wrapped a rare three-day closed-door retreat in Kruger National Park, focused on how southern Africa should respond to East-West competition, economic fragmentation, and fast-moving tech. (
DevDiscourse
)
Comment
: As our world goes wild, middle players are trying to avoid ending up mere spectators. SADC hasn’t yet gone beyond the usual statements about unity and self-reliance, but it’s a start.
🇷🇺
RUSSIA — Putin lashes out again.
Putin has again hit Kyiv with one of the war’s largest combined missile + drone barrages, this time featuring his vaunted Oreshnik hypersonics. He’s hit multiple apartment buildings, with the death toll at four and climbing. (
EuroNews
)
Comment
: Putin threatened this kind of attack if Ukraine didn’t agree a ceasefire during his annual victory day parade in Moscow. The Ukrainians agreed and now Putin has done it anyway (instead citing hits on a student dorm in Russian-occupied Ukraine). As his troops now lose ground, he’s trying to warn the world he’s far from exhausted, while showing hardliners at home he can still hit hard.
Extra Intrigue
🤣
Your weekly round-up of the world’s lighter news
An Albino
‘Trump’ buffalo has gone viral
in Bangladesh for his blonde combover hairdo.
A pothole repair
truck in the UK has become stuck
in the pothole it was sent to repair.
Still in the UK, a radio station has had to apologise after
accidentally announcing the death
of King Charles.
A laser hair removal device has
triggered an airport bomb scare
in Melbourne.
And a Swedish minister has rejected France’s new nicotine pouch ban as
“
an attack on the Swedish way of life
”
.
From our sponsors
Ask Attio anything: prep for calls, update records, spot deals at risk Over 4,000 startups including Granola, Wispr Flow, and Lightdash, already use Attio.
Try Attio for free.
Documentary of the day
The documentary’s poster
We weren’t planning on cancelling our Saturday night plans to instead binge a niche Mandarin-language documentary called
2026 China Food Delivery Rider Survival Report
. But then two things happened to really pique our interest:
First
, the film went viral — even reaction videos
about
this documentary have gone viral, then
Second
, Beijing suddenly pulled it off every platform and scrubbed it from China’s internet!
So naturally, the Streisand Effect dictates we (and therefore you)
must
now know what exactly is so spicy about this 28-minute film. And the answer…? Not much!
That’s what makes this particular censorship so intriguing: this film (by one of China’s legit studios) is more a quiet and deeply human look at life for the country’s 13 million delivery drivers — dorm life, family reunions, shrinking pay — rather than any fiery manifesto.
And yet in 2026, it seems even everyday realism might be too much for Beijing’s nervous censors. Mandarin-speakers outside China can still
see this archived version
.
Today’s poll
What do you think is going on with US-Iran talks?
🤝 A real deal is close
🥫🦶 It's just another extension
✍️ Other (write us!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Thursday’s poll:
What do you think of stablecoins?
💸
What's not to like: they're faster, cheaper, better (36%)
🚫
Too risky (61%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (3%)
Your two cents:
✍️
P.H:
“The world should move cautiously on this. The more you consolidate onto a single, cross-jurisdictional system, the greater the risk of irreparable damage when something goes wrong - accidentally or maliciously.”
💸
J.L:
“The horse has bolted on capital controls, so anything that allows low-cost, low-risk, and low-friction transactions just makes sense.”
🚫
S.F:
“They're useful if one is doing DeFi, but for most people they're a needless added layer of risk.”