URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/free-premium-newsletter-may-2026-f75a52a8d6686c7b
Title: 🌍 What Xi really wants in North Korea
Date: 2026-06-08

In partnership with
Today’s briefing:
— What Xi
really
wants in North Korea
— Peru’s nailbiter election
— New Gen-Z trend just dropped
Your Insider’s briefing:
— What Xi
really
wants in North Korea
— Peru’s nailbiter election
— New Gen-Z trend just dropped
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Half a century ago, North Korea opened an embassy in Australia, only to suddenly close it and flee six months later!
The North Koreans were in such a mysterious rush to the airport, they completely totalled their official Mercedes, and (legend has it) then staggered to the nearest house for help, only to be greeted by none other than the ambassador of rival
South
Korea!
But why the North’s sudden departure from Australia? Canberra’s not
that
bad. There’ve been all kinds of quirky theories, including outrage that the local Mercedes dealer already sold its best wheels to the rival South, and even that the infamous Panmunjom confrontation (leaving two US soldiers dead) involved a ‘made in Australia’ axe.
But I’ve always felt the truth is probably much more mundane: 1975 was around the time the North started defaulting on its debts, including to Australian lenders. So Kim Il-Sung was probably just pruning his fiefdom’s expensive overseas operations.
Still, all that to ask, as we explore
Xi Jinping’s rare visit to North Korea
… is there some grand strategy behind all this? Or are Xi-Kim ties exactly what they say on the label?
Managing Editor
Jeremy Dicker
🎧 Like Walken needed cowbell, many of
you need more Intrigue
. So
become an Insider
today and get our unfiltered takes, podcast, horizon-scan, and more!
Number of the day
50.09% vs 49.91%
That’s now the left-populist
Roberto Sánchez’s
slight
lead
over the right-populist Keiko Fujimori in Peru’s high-stakes election, with ~97% of votes counted. Translating to a razor-thin 30k vote margin, it’ll likely all (again!) come down to overseas ballots.
Kim-possible.
If you really love someone, let them go…
But if they then run into the arms of Vladimir Putin, maybe go back and hug them tighter?
At least that’s what
might
’ve been on Xi Jinping’s mind when he decided to schedule his
first trip abroad for 2026
(!), and his first visit to Korea’s hermit North since 2019.
After a personal tarmac welcome from local dictator Kim Jong Un and his wife Ri Sol-ju, the two ol’ neighbours rolled into town past synchronised crowds, epic flags and portraits, and cute kids with balloons, amid what state outlets described as “
thunderous cheers
”.
But now that Xi and his famous wife (Peng Liyuan) have returned home from their night in Kim’s Kumsusan State Guesthouse, what was
Xi
really
doing in North Korea?
Here are
four top explanations
, starting with… (yes)…
Do you need a reason to visit your neighbour?
Xi isn’t visiting because June is a lovely time to see Pyongyang — sure, the climate is pleasant, but monsoon season hits any day now. The
official
reason is to mark the 65th anniversary of China’s only mutual defence pact, signed between Zhou Enlai and Kim’s grandfather back in 1961.
And okay, 65 years is a beautiful blue sapphire anniversary, but surely Xi could’ve just sent a nice fruit basket.
So why the visit?
He’s partly just signalling that he’s still
committed
to Kim. But speaking of commitments…
Russia
With Xi largely watching from the sidelines, Putin and Kim have now spent three years pumping their ties:
Putin needed help
invading his smaller neighbour, and duly received ~10,000 North Korean troops and 5,000 engineers, plus shells and rockets.
In return?
Kim has received Russian tech (spy satellites, air defence, electronic warfare), combat experience, a mutual defence treaty, oil and food shipments, plus hundreds of millions in annual remittances from the 30,000+ North Korean workers now in Russia.
And that’s a legit haul for Kim, but it still pales compared to the bigger picture of Putin effectively helping Kim solidify his hermit state as a power
beyond
Beijing’s shadow.
So… how does Xi feel about this?
There’s breathlessness among the commentariat, but our sense is he’s probably got mixed feelings, like Kanye interrupting Taylor at the VMAs: you enjoy the chaos, but you’re not sure this will end well for anyone — sure, helping Putin’s failed invasion of Ukraine also means distracting and diluting Western power.
But a more confident and independent North Korea arguably also just loosens Xi’s leverage over this corner of China’s periphery, especially given Kim already went…
Nuclear
Glancing through China’s
readout
from Monday’s Kim meeting, there’s one
radioactive elephant in the room
that goes totally unmentioned: Kim’s illegal nukes.
To be clear, Xi didn’t just forget. How could he: Kim literally just toured a new nuclear site last week, and pledged an “
exponential
” ramp-up for his illegal nukes ahead.
Rather, the reality is this was
a striking omission
by a UN Security Council member responsible for
enforcing
nuclear rules against Kim. But it wasn’t new: the last time Xi publicly reiterated support for “
denuclearisation of the Korean Peninsula
” was in
2023
!
So why the change?
We’d argue it’s a mix of
a
) the perceived futility of reversing DPRK’s nuclear advances at this stage, and relatedly
b
) Xi prioritising alliance and border stability over what he might see as Western-led concerns around a treaty ally’s nuclear program.
Besides, there are more profitable subjects to focus on, like…
The economy
When Singapore’s foreign minister swung through North Korea last month, he dropped a
surprisingly gushing video
about the boom there since his last visit eight years ago.
And Western outlets are now backing up all the fancy-car and oven-fired pizza anecdotes, with even the WSJ
declaring
North Korea “
the world’s most surprising economic success story
” — Pyongyang supposedly built more homes than Los Angeles or Chicago last year!
So…
what’s going on?
There’s clearly a base effect at play: you can grow your economy by a third when it’s tiny. But that boom still looks real, driven by arms sales to Putin, rebounding exports to China, and cybercrime proceeds.
And yet,
how does Xi feel?
Again, we’d argue he’s got mixed feelings, like Obi-Wan watching Anakin team up with Palpatine:
technically
advancing the plot against the Republic, but urgh you’ve got a bad feeling. Yes, a prosperous North Korea means a stable border. But it also gives Kim more room to manoeuvre, and erodes Xi’s leverage.
So that might be why Xi used his visit to call for the “
full reopening of border crossings and the resumption of civil aviation flights and international passenger trains
” — ie, to reassert China as
North Korea’s economic patron
, plus Xi’s related leverage over his periphery.
But will it be enough to woo Kim back?
Intrigue’s Take
After decades as one of the most sanctioned regimes on Earth, today’s Kim family is somehow now richer, more stable, and more independent than at any point in junior’s 14-year rule. And his nukes (together with Putin’s arms spree) have been a core part of that story, helping deliver real cash, oil, food, tech, and even a defence treaty.
So just think about some of the lessons others might glean from that kind of outcome…
Intrigue Insiders
Membership
Unlock Intrigue's Take
Our experienced, unfiltered takes on what's really going on.
Plus:
✓
Daily audio edition
✓
Completely ad-free
✓
Insider Telegram community
✓
Monthly AMAs
Start your free trial →
$14.99/mo · $149/yr
7 days free
Intrigue’s Take
After decades as one of the most sanctioned regimes on Earth, today’s Kim family is somehow now richer, more stable, and more independent than at any point in junior’s 14-year rule. And his nukes (together with Putin’s arms spree) have been a core part of that story, helping deliver real cash, oil, food, tech, and even a defence treaty.
So just think about some of the lessons others might glean from that kind of outcome:
First
, it arguably vindicates
nukes as the ultimate regime-survival tool
. Cross that threshold and find
one
revisionist great-power patron, then wait out the West’s leverage, if not interest. Those new apartment blocks start to look more like a giant middle finger.
But
second
, absent Xi even pretending to care, Trump’s rumoured interest in reviving
DPRK nuclear talks
now looks even more futile than the last round, particularly with Iran’s mullahs having just stared down America’s big stick (war
)
. And speaking of Iran…
Third
, if Kim is showing the nuclear promised land, it’ll vindicate not only
Iran
’s hardliners pushing to cross the threshold, but also its neighbours and foes still hustling to stop it.
The result of all these lessons looks to us less like any world order we grew up in, and more like some
new world of networked autocracies
propping one another up with arms, tech, sanctions-evasion, and diplomatic coverage.
So okay, if military power alone looks insufficient against Iran, and economic power alone looks insufficient against the Kim family,
what power is left?
The emerging answer — and one you hear from voices like Finland’s Stubb — is some kind of alignment of middle and free powers doing the same thing but in reverse: backing one another via defence, tech, and supply chains, in a kind of flexible multilateralism that shares the same basic True North, but without demanding complete philosophical alignment on the route.
And yet… to see
any
hint of that right now, dear Intriguer, you’ve first got to squint past all the trade wars, culture wars, and domestic political cycles. But squint we must.
Sound even smarter:
One recent Amnesty
report
quotes Northern defectors describing public execution for those caught sharing South Korea’s tunes and TV dramas!
From our sponsors
The largest IPO in history is coming. Where will all that liquid money go?
SpaceX just filed for an IPO valued at up to $1.75 trillion. When that much capital becomes liquid all at once, where it goes next is the big question.
Meanwhile, spring art auctions in NY cleared $2.5 billion, with 15+ new artist records.
Prized, physical assets with fixed and scarce supply. When the ultra-wealthy get liquid, it’s one of the markets they reach for to diversify.
Masterworks
lets you into that art market without needing the nine figures. Its members invest in shares of blue-chip artwork by artists like Banksy, Basquiat and Warhol.
The track record to-date?
$1.3B deployed across 500+ artworks
29 sales to date
Net annualized returns like 16.5%, 17.6%, and 17.8%, not including those unsold*
Skip the waitlist to join Masterworks.
*Investing involves risk. Past performance is not indicative of future returns. See important disclosures at
masterworks.com/cd
.
😎
Prefer ad-free reading? Become an
Intrigue Insider
today!
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES — OpenAI joins the IPO party.
Following rivals like Anthropic and SpaceX, OpenAI (of ChatGPT fame) has finally filed its confidential IPO paperwork. No pricing or timeline yet, but the street is already pricing in a late 2026 debut, with a valuation north of $1T. (
OpenAI
)
Comment
:
We wrote about this year’s monster IPOs
here
.
🇨🇳
CHINA — Sell abroad.
China’s domestic car sales plunged 22% (yoy) last month, while its auto exports soared ~75% the same month. (
CNBC
)
Comments
: That 22% domestic plunge (China’s eighth straight drop) also semi-explains the ~75% export surge — with a saturated home market, automakers need to sell abroad or die. But if you’d like to nerd out, this
new U-Chicago article
builds on three years of research and 60+ insider interviews to clarify how we got here — yes, via Beijing’s subsidies and industrial policy, but with much more bottom-up chaos and local improvisation than the usual “Beijing master plan” story might suggest.
🇳🇱
NETHERLANDS — ICC prosecutor suspended.
The Hague’s
International Criminal Court
(ICC) has suspended its own chief prosecutor (the UK’s Karim Khan) with immediate effect, pending a final decision by the ICC’s ~125 member states. Khan argues the UN investigation into his alleged misconduct towards a female aide is politically motivated. (
Guardian
)
Comment
: Khan has been on a victory lap claiming exoneration by the UN probe, but the reality is the investigation just summarised the allegations against him plus his own denials, without making a finding either way.
🇵🇰
PAKISTAN — Something’s brewing.
The details are murky amid an internet blackout, but violent clashes between police and protestors have left at least a dozen dead in Pakistan-administered Kashmir, ahead of a planned rally by a banned group demanding reforms. (
AP
)
Comment
: Islamabad is already juggling an economic crisis, IMF talks, and evolving security challenges. Fresh police brutality in Kashmir risks further eroding the government’s legitimacy in a region symbolically vital to Pakistani nationalism.
🇬🇧
UNITED KINGDOM — Outed.
British security services have discovered a secret ceiling camera inside a sensitive Whitehall building used by officials who approved China’s controversial new mega-embassy in London. (
The Times
$)
Comment
: Nothing says “we have a counter-intelligence problem” like mini cameras in Whitehall, but the more intriguing question for us is who leaked this discovery, and why: it could just be the opposition scoring points, or hawks pressuring the UK’s mega-embassy approval for China, now going through British court appeals later this month.
🇫🇷
FRANCE — Sonic bust.
France and Germany have finally abandoned their long-troubled joint Future Combat Air System (FCAS) after years of deadlock between France’s Dassault and the Germany-based Airbus defence arm. Meanwhile, the Swiss are reportedly now eyeing a Franco-Italian alternative to America’s delayed Patriot air defences. (
AA
)
Comment
: That FCAS news, while unsurprising, hints that national industrial interests can still trump European solidarity, and that the continent’s genuine strategic autonomy is still as much a slogan as any emerging reality.
🇷🇺
RUSSIA — Where’s Elvira?
Putin’s long-serving central bank chief (Nabiullina) has dropped off the speaker list for today’s NAUFOR securities conference in Moscow, after disappearing from last week’s St Petersburg forum line-up. The official reason is sick leave. (
Interfax
🇷🇺
)
Comment
: One of the last genuinely competent and semi-independent technocrats atop the Russian system, Nabiullina has long been Putin’s public face of economic stability. So maybe she’s just sick! But her rate-rises to stabilise the ruble have made no shortage of oligarch enemies, and her demise (for whatever reason) would augur more bad news for Putin.
Extra Intrigue
💼
Intrigue’s jobs board is back!
Chancellor
@ Australian National University in Canberra
Chief, Talent & Organizational Development
@ OSCE in Vienna
Natural Resources Specialist
@ Asian Development Bank in Mongolia
Growth Marketing Lead
@ Airbnb in Tokyo
From our sponsors
Build a global team without building global infrastructure.
Hire in 180+ countries
Stay compliant locally
Run payroll globally
Get in touch
😎
Prefer
ad-free reading
? Become an
Intrigue Insider
today!
Life hack of the day
Courtesy of @malheeelife
A new Gen Z trend just dropped in South Korea, and it’s called
dopamine sites
— gloriously fake websites that deliver the full dopamine hit of a late-night Uber Eats or impulse Fashion Nova order, but without any actual hit to your wallet or waistline!
You browse the catalogue, stuff your virtual shopping cart, ‘place’ that sweet sweet order, and even track your eager courier, but the order never actually shows up because
it’s all fake!
You get the pure, raw, uncut anticipation of the retail hunt, but without any cost.
Meanwhile, another local has come up with
a virtual cigarette break
, where you chat anonymously with other stressed souls while aimlessly watching a timer. He wanted to give non-smokers the same ‘damta’ (cigarette break), just without the cough or smell.
Now, we’re mindful not to over-index on any single
internet whimsy
, but it does all feel on-brand for South Korea’s youth, who are now navigating brutal housing costs, an intense work culture, and a musical chairs-themed job market. Anyway, take comfort knowing that somewhere in Seoul, there’s now a fake rider “
arriving in 8 minutes
”.
Today’s poll
Who do you think now has more influence over North Korea?
🇷🇺 Vladimir Putin
🇨🇳 Xi Jinping
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
In this chaotic world of ours, where do you stand on golf?
🏌️ Love it (12%)
⛳ Play when I can (16%)
🥱
Peaceful waste of time (72%)
Your two cents:
🥱
I.H:
“Slow, boring, a terrible waste of natural resources. Worst of all, I'd probably be bad at it.”
🏌️
R.D:
“It's an easy way to connect with nature, move your body and socialise. It is also a test in individual integrity.”