URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/are-evs-dying-or-soaring
Title: 🌍 Are EVs dying or soaring?
Date: 2026-05-26

Your Insider’s briefing:
— Are EVs dying or soaring?
— Why Kiwis are googling ‘funkee monkee’
— Malaysia’s hottest new band
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Years ago, John Koenig started
The Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows
in an attempt to name those emotions we all feel but can rarely articulate. A few seem apt as we explore
what EV sales might reveal
about our world:
Maybe it’s a dash of
anemoia
: that wistful ache for a time you never lived, like when Ferraris announced themselves via a visceral roar rather than a polite hum
Perhaps it’s the quiet triumph of
kenopsia
: the hollow stillness of places usually bustling, like roads now hosting quiet Cherys rather than boisterous Chevies, or…
Millions of new drivers across Bangkok, Jakarta, and Bogotá might now feel
exulansis
: a resigned surrender when you realise folks will never
truly
understand why a $5K China-made EV feels less like a compromise, and more like liberation.
All that and more below.
Managing Editor
Jeremy Dicker
Oh and welcome to the
many
Intrigue Insiders
now getting our daily podcast version, access to the group chat, a weekly re-cap, ad-free reading, and more! Our introductory rate
ends Sunday
, so it’s not too late to
become an Insider
and avoid any
onism
(the raw feeling of missing our deep cuts, unfiltered takes, and unparalleled community
😊
).
Number of the day
7%
That’s the share of China’s entire government revenue now coming from
China National Tobacco Corporation
, the state-owned cigarette monopoly. As China’s single largest source of state revenue, it earns ~$244B a year, and sells nearly half the world’s cigs!
The car that broke the internet.
That’s Ferrari’s new ‘Luce’ EV. Is it really
that
bad?
A luxury toaster. An Apple minivan. A $640k Prius. An Accord with a badge.
These are just some of the sick burns after
Ferrari launched its first-ever EV
... the Luce (Italian for ‘light’), because there's nothing cooler than pulling up to the country club sounding like the opening riff of a mid-tempo Nickelback hit.
After an initial 8% share drop, even the storied firm's ex-chair (
Montezemolo
) seemed genuinely emotional (more than normal in Italy), quipping "
at least China won’t copy it.
”
So if even a legendary $65B automaker like Ferrari, co-designing with an Apple-famous visionary like Jony Ive, can't seem to nail EVs right now, then… who can?
With a little help from the new
International Energy Agency (IEA) EV Outlook
, let's take a quick
whip around the EV world in five numbers
, starting with...
🚗
23 million
That's how many
EVs the world will buy
this year, reaching 28% of all auto sales. A decade ago? Barely 1.5%. This year's EV
growth
(~3M) now matches total EV sales in 2020!
But zoom in slightly and you’ll see…
🇨🇳
75%
That's roughly how many of the world's new EVs are now made in just one country:
China
.
It's partly the result of smart bets by brilliant founders like Wang Chuanfu (BYD), pioneering top-tier EV batteries. But it's also the result of staggering volumes of unlawful state support — think subsidies, sweetheart finance, and cheap land and utilities.
The result is
unbeatable prices
— we're talking just $5k for China's
Besturn Pony
.
The result is also China's EV-makers
overshooting production
, making 2.5 million more EVs than they can sell at home. So what happens to those 2.5 million extras? China either
a
) sells them abroad, or
b
) watches ~50 unprofitable EV-makers go broke.
And guess which option China picked? Longer-term it might end up with both, but for now it just
doubled
its EV exports in a single year
!
So... who's buying all China's EVs?
🇪🇺
62%
That's the yoy growth in China’s EV exports (including non-Chinese brands) to Europe in the first two months of this year, pushing
China's share of Europe's market
to a record 22%. Not impressed? Well five years ago that share was ~3%. A decade ago it was ~zero!
Still not impressed? Well this growth is happening even though Europe has erected a solid
7-35% tariff wall
to help its own automakers counter China's subsidies! Or to put it another way, that continued growth points to China’s massive scale and cost advantages.
So maybe Europe should adopt
a US-style 100% tariff
to effectively block China's EVs? But we've already seen how China retaliates, whether on French cognac or Spanish pork.
And meanwhile, you think EVs are just for rich yuppies...? Well yes okay maybe, but also...
🌏
80%
That's the record-breaking annual surge in EV sales we just saw across
the developing world
(ex China), with a majority of sold models made in China. Specifically, annual EV sales have
more than doubled
across Southeast Asia, and are up 75% in Latin America.
Why the rush?
It's partly about
survival
: throw in the largest oil shock in history (Hormuz), minimal tariffs, and price-sensitive drivers, and you can see how switching to a $15k EV might look more like an economic life-raft than a country club flex.
So you've now arguably got China single-handedly
re-shaping mobility
and locking in longer-term brand loyalty across some of the world's fastest-growing middle classes.
Okay, where’s the US in all this…?
🇺🇸
27%
That's how far
EV sales just
fell
in the US the first quarter of 2026, with the total EV market share in the US now seemingly plateauing at around 6%.
Why?
It's partly a
policy hangover
, after the federal $7.5k tax credit expired. It's partly also record-low wartime consumer sentiment, amplified by rates staying higher for longer.
But it's partly also because, protected from China's low-cost competition, most US EVs are still priced and framed as luxury items, leaving many folks preferring trusty gas wheels. The result is that
legacy US automakers
, terrified of burning cash, and responding to these immediate incentives inside Fortress America, are unwinding their massive EV bets.
So maybe we should wrap via one final number: the most popular vehicle in the US is the SUV / pickup. But guess how many fully electric pickups Ford now keeps on its factory lines?
Zero
.
Intrigue’s Take
There are all sorts of valid (and even unavoidable) reasons for the US to erect its massive tariff wall against China’s low-cost EV flood. But…
Intrigue's Take · Insiders Only
To get full access to our experienced, unfiltered takes on what the news really means and what's coming next, become an Intrigue Insider!
Plus:
✓
Ad-free reading
✓
Daily audio edition
✓
Telegram community
Start Free Trial →
$79/yr · 7 days free
Intrigue’s Take
There are all sorts of valid (and even unavoidable) reasons for the US to erect its massive tariff wall against China’s low-cost EV flood. But while it was intended as a kind of shield, the lack of competitive pressure might now be acting as a sedative.
We mean a sedative not so much for US pioneers like Tesla (the Model Y is still a top-selling
car) but on
a
) the US consumer, which now sees fewer reasons — and options — to make the shift, and also
b
) legacy automakers now approaching a world in which, even if they want the shift, will realistically have to buy most tech from China anyway.
Meanwhile, even
if Europe raises its own tariff wall
higher, we’re already seeing how China’s automakers can skirt it: local assembly, plug-in loop-holes, or shifting to the South.
So if you hear folks talking about the EV revolution stalling, it might be more accurate to note that
it’s actually fracturing
: in most of the world, it’s accelerating, but now in China-made vehicles, and driven by Global South buyers, fleeing volatile oil markets rattled by war. It’s almost as if the US is not so much stopping that future, as just opting out of it.
And yet… it’s
hardly a one-way street in China’s favour, either
: there are now dozens of nations quietly building their own tariff walls against China, including not just developed economies, but also emerging players like Brazil (35% tariffs), India (100%), Turkey (40%), Mexico (50%), and Indonesia (demanding 40% local components).
So at some point, China risks running out of pressure valves for its overcapacity, hinting at more domestic challenges ahead. But how many other automakers will still be left to care?
Sound even smarter:
The IEA’s projected 2026 EV sales growth is
despite
a 8% yoy Q1 drop this year, driven largely by the end of incentives in the US and China.
Not everyone hates Ferrari’s new Luce. Car critic and friend of Intrigue Noelle Faulkner was at the launch, and
said
,
"Luce isn’t for everyone. But part of its purpose is to shatter existing clichés".
From our sponsors
One brand built 30+ landing pages through Viktor without a single developer.
Each page mapped to a specific ad group. All deployed within hours.
Viktor
wrote the code and shipped every one from a Slack message.
That same team has Viktor monitoring ad accounts across the portfolio and posting performance briefs before the day starts. One colleague. Always on. Across every account.
5,700+ teams. 3,000+ integrations.
Start free. $100 in credits →
🤫
Prefer ad-free reading?
Become an Insider
today! Introductory rate ends Sunday.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇨🇦
CANADA
-
Want some gas?
Canada has reportedly closed a 20-year LNG supply deal with Germany, due to be announced today (Wednesday). (
CBC
)
Comment
:
Call it the latest EU-Canada step to slowly diversify away from the US.
🇸🇳
SENEGAL
-
Look who’s back…
The Senegalese parliament has reinstated Ousmane Sonko as speaker, barely days after President Faye dismissed him as PM amid months of tensions. (
France24
)
Comment
: Faye partly dismissed Sonko for his opposition to a new IMF deal, and yet the instability sparked by his removal might complicate Faye’s efforts to get that deal!
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
Travel curbs for AI leaders.
Beijing has imposed travel curbs on top AI talent from tech firms like Alibaba and Deepseek, meaning they’ll now need permission to travel abroad! (
Bloomberg
$)
Comment
: Similar
curbs are already in place for state employees and top scientists, but expanding them to the private sector’s AI researchers, executives and startup founders is both
a
) an attempt to prevent leaks, poaching, and IP outflow amid US-China rivalry, but also
b
) a reminder that China’s private sector ain’t always so private.
🇱🇧
LEBANON
-
Israel escalation.
Amid mutual allegations of ceasefire breaches, Israel’s Netanyahu has now ordered his forces to “
crush
” Hezbollah, with airstrikes and ground operations now expanding across southern Lebanon. Meanwhile, the IDF says its Tuesday strikes in Gaza have killed the latest commander of the Hamas military wing. (
Al Monitor
)
🇸🇬
SINGAPORE
-
North Korea visit.
Foreign Minister Balakrishnan (of
built-myself-an-AI-brain
fame) has landed in North Korea for the first such visit to the hermit state since 2018. He’s on a regional tour with stops including China and South Korea. (
NK News
)
Comment
:
Singapore is one of very few states maintaining functional DPRK ties, despite being a US ~partner — it even hosted the 2018 Trump-Kim Jong Un summit. We wonder if Balakrishnan’s tour means Trump is now pushing for another summit, or if
Balakrishnan is just trying to keep channels open amid heightened tensions
.
🇧🇴
BOLIVIA
-
Carrots and sticks.
Mass anti-government protests are continuing amid economic hardship, shrugging off
a
) newish business-friendly President Paz halving his own salary to mollify anger, and
b
) the legislature authorising him to deploy troops to the streets. Meanwhile, President Lula in neighbouring Brazil has publicly backed Bolivia’s government and called for calm and dialogue. (
Al Jazeera
)
Comment
: That Lula intervention is intriguing, given he’s traditionally aligned more with Bolivia’s leftist Morales (now hiding from an arrest warrant). It might be a way to appeal to moderates ahead of Brazil’s November elections, but likely reflects Brazil’s interests in Bolivian stability and energy (it relies on piped Bolivian natural gas).
🇪🇸
SPAIN
-
No predictions here.
Spain’s consumer protection agency has temporarily blocked prediction sites Polymarket and Kalshi amid claims they were operating unlicensed. Several others like France and the Netherlands have already restricted or banned these platforms. (
Guardian
)
Comment
: Why now? It’s a response to
a
) their surge in popularity, and
b
) recent scandals around government insider-trading — a dilemma we explored
here
. With Europe seemingly defaulting to treating these sites as betting platforms, we might see a slowdown in mainstream adoption across the continent.
Extra Intrigue
Here’s what people around the world are googling…
🇫🇷
French
folks are searching for ‘
heatwave
’ as parts of Europe (and
India
!) swelter in
record-breaking temperatures
.
🇨🇦
Canadians
wanted answers on the ‘
Toronto power outage
’ after
the power went out
across downtown parts of Canada’s largest city.
And parents in
🇳🇿
New Zealand
googled ‘
funkee monkee
’ after several squishy children’s toys were recalled due to
traces of asbestos
.
Band of the day
Charisma performs at Malaysia’s embassy in Beijing. Credits: @Deandleeve via Instagram
It’s no secret some embassies have cooler perks than others. We’ve toured you through the elegant libraries, renowned chefs, and designer pools over the years, but the Malaysian embassy in Beijing has something even better: an in-house nine-member band!
Aptly named
Charisma
, the group has now become a fixture at Malaysia’s events in town, rocking everything from jogets (traditional Malay dance) and modern Malay hits, to playful wedding classics like
Toleh Menoleh (Glancing around).
Anyway, time to spruce up your next posting application with ‘proficient in saxophone’?
Today’s poll
Where do you see EV sales a decade from now?
🚗 Approaching 100% of global auto sales
🚕 Closer to 50%
🚙 Stable at 28%
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you share Pope Leo's concerns around AI?
🗼
Yes, we're building another Tower of Babel (89%)
👎 No, he's inflating the risks + ignoring the benefits (9%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (1%)
Your two cents:
🗼
D.K:
“Advances in technology and medicine often, if not always, outrun ethical guardrails and standards, especially when the financial upside is extremely lucrative.”
👎
G.B:
“Popes have historically warned about new technologies fitting an ultra-conservative church’s needs first and foremost.”
✍️
S.D:
“Don't really need religious organizations weighing in on business.”