URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/eat-this-summit-sandwich
Title: 🌍 Eat this summit sandwich
Date: 2026-06-01

Today’s briefing:
— Eat this summit sandwich
— Go do research in Bahrain
— Our first standing ovation of the day
Your Insider’s briefing:
— Eat this summit sandwich
— Go do research in Bahrain
— Our first standing ovation of the day
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. If you’ve ever experienced summit diplomacy, you’ll know it occupies a truly special circle of hell — equal parts pomp, exhaustion, and absurdity.
One minute your jaw drops as (true story) the King of Spain leans into the microphone to tell Hugo Chavez, live on camera, “
¿Por qué no te callas?
” (“
Why don’t you shut up?
”).
The next summit (true story) you pass out on a random conference hall couch after working 40 hours straight, only to wake up some time the next afternoon, squinting into the halogen hall-lights above, when a big silhouetted face suddenly peers down and announces, “
hello, I’m Kevin
” — that’s how Australia’s then prime minister woke my friend.
So if you’re wondering why today’s briefing leads with
two
very
different versions of the summitry circus (Singapore’s Shangri-La
and
Putin’s EAEU)
, it might just be because that ol’ fashioned diplomatic romanticism really tugged on our sleeve, okay?
Managing Editor
Jeremy Dicker
💼
Bonus true story
: many Intriguers get
their office to cover the premium Insiders subscription
! So if reading Intrigue keeps you sharper at work, just send
this email
to your boss — it’s easy approval for a serious edge. You’ll then get our daily unfiltered takes, weekly horizon-scans, monthly AMAs, and beyond.
More info here
!
Quote of the day
“
The miners were stunned at the accuracy of the document, which included details on a privately held iron ore miner.
”
That’s a line from Australia’s business daily,
reporting
the mining industry’s shock during earlier negotiations that seemed to suggest China’s authorities had somehow gained precise, confidential details of internal company operations, to get the upper hand.
Parallel universes.
What’s the best sandwich out there? Americans will die on a hill for the philly cheesesteak, our Vietnamese friends swear by the bahn mi, and Aussies might fight you over the democracy sausage (don’t ask). But they’re all wrong.
For diplomacy nerds like us (and therefore you by association), the best sandwich is
a summit sandwich
, and this weekend served us quite the pairing, starting with…
Singapore’s Shangri-La Dialogue
: Asia’s top security and defence conference, packed with ministers, generals, and spooks (
🤫
) from 40+ countries, plus…
The
Supreme Eurasian Economic Council:
four post-Soviet nations (Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan) plus Russia, who all met in Astana.
As you might expect, those two events had some pretty distinct... flavours, but those differences offer insights into how our world is tackling three big themes, starting with…
Artificial Intelligence
“
The Russian Federation is one of, perhaps, the few countries that is both capable of creating, and is indeed creating, its own sovereign platforms for the development of artificial intelligence.
” -
Vladimir Putin
, Russian President.
This regional summit in Kazakhstan explicitly focused on AI, and Putin used the stage to pitch his
Russia as the region’s natural AI partner
. Why?
It’s
really about control
, of both…
a)
AI
: a heavily-filtered sovereign model is deeply attractive for any regime already censoring the internet and forcing folks onto state-run apps, and…
b)
turf
: he’s urging joint efforts and even offering to host next year’s summit, not because he’s a team player, but because AI now offers another arena to seek status at home and relevance abroad, particularly in a region having real doubts.
But it’s
hard to see his fellow presidents at the podium taking him up on that offer
given how much Russian AI already
a
) lags behind the US and Chinese pioneers,
b
) lacks investment,
c
) faces stringent hardware sanctions, and
d
) struggles to retain top talent.
Ok, passing the mic to the defence wonks over at Singapore’s
Shangri-La
…
“
The erosion of predictability and compression of decision-making timelines [due to AI] are fundamentally reshaping the nature of interstate conflict and strategic deterrence.
” -
Nauman Zakria
, Pakistani Lieutenant General.
This was one of the few AI mentions at Shangri-La, and it came from none other than the
head of Pakistan’s rocket force command
! So he’s not speaking in the abstract, but rather highlighting the nightmare scenario for nuclear-armed neighbours like Pakistan and India now grappling with
seconds-long
decision windows in the age of AI.
Partnerships
“
I do not reproach, but strongly urge to implement all the goals and objectives of our Union in a timely and complete manner
” -
Aleksandr Lukashenko
, Belarusian President.
If you’ve ever taken part in a family dinner or multilateral forum, you know
drama is natural
(your estranged Uncle Gus probably insists it’s
healthy
), but Lukashenko’s blunt jab here is really striking: 12 years after agreeing on deeper economic integration, this bloc still hasn’t nailed down mutual digital signatures, and yet Putin wants to pivot to AI!
But there was
an on-stage silence
even louder than any Belarusian dictator’s words: Armenia’s Westward-leaning Nikol Pashinyan skipped this summit altogether, in yet another reminder of how rapidly Putin is now haemorrhaging influence across the region.
Now passing the mic back for a related (and blunt) message out of
Shangri-La
…
“
The era of the United States subsidizing the defense of wealthy nations is over. We need partners, not protectorates.
” -
Pete Hegseth
, US Secretary of Defence.
It’s related how?
Two very different pacts, but with one shared problem: the patron-client model is fraying, just in opposite ways. Belarus (client) wants Moscow (patron) to deliver on old promises, whereas the US (patron) is increasingly telling
its
clients
to step up.
Iran
“
The president called for the immediate implementation of national currency exchange mechanisms and independent payment systems to insulate member states from unjust, external sanctions
” -
Readout
from Iranian President Pezeshkian's letter to Putin’s EAEU.
Iran’s regime has shown it can survive war, but it now seems increasingly wary of how its own
economic crisis
might finish the job. That’s why Pezeshkian is calling here for new payment rails that bypass US controls: the Islamic Republic needs cash, and quick.
So did Putin’s bloc heed Iran’s call? Hah no. Per Lukashenko above, they’re not
quite
up to the task yet. But hey, you lose 100% of the shots you don’t take.
Meanwhile,
back at the Shangri-La
…
“
Today, we are seeing a situation in which the Strait of Hormuz is … neither free nor open. […] Who benefits from such a situation?
” -
Shinjirō Koizumi
, Japanese Defence Minister.
Koizumi — a future PM and Columbia alum — isn’t just stating the obvious here. He’s very carefully drawing a parallel: if Iran can weaponise a maritime chokepoint, imagine what others (he carefully avoids the word “
China
”) could do in the Indo-Pacific.
Anyway, whether financial or logistical, it’s all a reminder of how much everyone is now scanning for chokepoint vulnerabilities.
Intrigue’s Take
This, dear Intriguer, looks like multipolarity in practice: no longer a stable balance of power, but a more…
Intrigue Insiders
Membership
Unlock Intrigue's Take
Our experienced, unfiltered takes on what's really going on.
Plus:
✓
Daily audio edition
✓
Completely ad-free
✓
Insider Telegram community
✓
Monthly AMAs
Start your free trial →
$14.99/mo · $149/yr
7 days free
Intrigue’s Take
This, dear Intriguer, looks like multipolarity in practice: no longer a stable balance of power, but a more transactional, brittle system where traditional blocs fray faster than new ones can form.
So what’s the answer?
Part of it will happen at home
. History’s grim experiences with multipolar instability have often stemmed from authoritarians repressing at home and oppressing abroad. So while we rightly think a lot about how US-China rivalry will shape our century ahead, there’s a big related question around the
broader
future of authoritarianism — a future in which (say) Putin’s neighbours keep drifting from his grip, or Iran’s people shrug off their mullahs. That’s a plausible multipolar future that’s maybe not so unstable after all, even if our transition to that future gets more volatile in the meantime.
Another part of this will happen in the shadows.
As the stakes soar and timelines tighten, we’ll see more real business shift into the shadows via spook-to-spook channels, like the one nobody seems to be talking about from this weekend: Singapore’s traditional spymaster conclave in a secure location away from the Shangri-La. Or to put it another way, when public posturing gets louder, spies often play a sharper deconfliction role.
And yes, part must also happen the old-fashioned way.
We’re talking the unglamorous sides of diplomacy like building faster crisis hotlines, negotiating credible escalation safeguards, and hosting boring-assed low-profile ‘Track II’ dialogues for backchanneling.
All this  to say that, in the end, our new multipolar world will never be stable by default — but it
will
be as stable as the guardrails we manage to build and the diplomacy we’re still willing to practice, even if it’s boring or in the shadows.
Sound even smarter:
Russian finance officials are
reportedly
now warning Putin that his defence spending is unsustainable (something we’ve been warning for a while).
From our sponsors
What’s trending in HR in 2026
AI, remote work, and global hiring are reshaping HR.
This report
breaks down the biggest trends shaping teams in 2026.
See the trends
🏝️ Fancy ad-free reading?
Become an Intrigue Insider today
!
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES — You’re f***ing crazy.
President Trump has announced an Israel-Hezbollah de-escalation, but only after the US president (per Axios) called the Israeli PM “
f***ing crazy
” for resuming strikes on Hezbollah’s southern Beirut stronghold! Iran has long hinged its US talks on Israel first reaching a Hezbollah truce, though there are already reported clashes and statements casting doubt on Trump’s claimed Hezbollah de-escalation. (
Yahoo
)
Comment
: It all reminds us of this quip via Bloomberg’s Tracy Alloway:
“
Lord, grant me the confidence of an equity investor trading on an Axios headline.
”
🇷🇺
RUSSIA — Tanker seized.
French authorities have seized a Russian tanker in the Atlantic suspected of shadow fleet activities. Meanwhile, Putin has launched another 600 missiles and drones in his latest overnight attack on Ukrainian cities.  (
France24
)
🇬🇧
UNITED KINGDOM — Court says no, Brussels says yes.
The Hague’s
Permanent Court of Arbitration
has rejected Rwanda’s $134M compensation claim over the UK’s scrapped deal to deport irregular arrivals and asylum seekers to Rwanda. Meanwhile, the EU has just reached an in-principle deal allowing similar ‘return hubs’ outside the bloc. (
DW
)
Comment
: That court case helps Starmer close the book on one of the more vexed legacies he inherited, while the new EU law keeps the ‘return hubs’ concept alive elsewhere (including for the long-running Italy-Albania proposal).
🇨🇩
DR CONGO — Ebola borders tightening.
As the Bundibugyo outbreak tops 300 cases across Congo’s east, neighbours like Uganda, Kenya, Rwanda, and Burundi have intensified their border screening. Jitters have reached as far as Brazil and Italy, where authorities investigated (then ruled out) suspected traveller cases over the weekend. (
ABC
)
Comment
: The good news (per the WHO) is several confirmed cases have now made full recoveries. And the bonus good news is there are now three new vaccines in development (via Oxford, IAVI, and Moderna). The tougher news is that, in the meantime, this is all exacerbating Congo’s isolation when it can least afford it.
🇪🇹
ETHIOPIA — Ballot over bullet?
50 million folks have queued up to cast votes in their country’s first general election since the Tigray war, with Prime Minister Abiy’s party on track for a landslide. (
News24
)
Comment
: The Nobel laureate has a big base, but he’s also milking full incumbent advantages and suspended voting across restive regions like Tigray and parts of Amhara/Oromia. So this feels less a national election and more a controlled consolidation of power that risks deepening rather than healing ethnic fractures.
🇩🇰
DENMARK — Third time’s the charm.
Under the shadow of another
Trump tweet
hinting he might yoink Greenland from Denmark, Prime Minister Frederiksen has finally secured a third term after a record 69 days of coalition talks. Surviving her party’s worst result since 1903, she’s now at the head of a centre-left minority government with four parties. (
Al Jazeera
)
Comment
: Trump’s rhetoric has realistically played a cameo role here, with Frederiksen’s tough stance probably helping her glue this fractious grouping together. But the result also feels vulnerable to collapse, whether via budget votes or beyond.
Extra Intrigue
💼
The Intrigue jobs board is back!
Member of Staff, AI & Rule of Law
@ Anthropic in San Francisco
Head of Gas and Coal Markets Division
@ IEA in Paris
Junior Visiting Fellowship
@ CIDOB in Barcelona
Research Assistant (Middle East)
@ IISS in Bahrain
Standing ovation of the day
Pic courtesy of the American Society of Clinical Oncology
Thousands of oncologists from ~166 nations rose to their feet in Chicago over the weekend, hurling cheers and whistles at California’s
Revolution Medicines
biotech firm.
Why?
Revolution
presented test results for
daraxonrasib
, a revolutionary new pill that reportedly
doubled
the survival for folks around the world fighting pancreatic cancer! One leading oncologist has
described
the results as “
jaw-dropping
”.
See? It’s not all bad news out there.
🤟
Today’s poll
Okay but seriously, what do you think is the world's best sandwich?
🇻🇳 Bánh Mì
🇹🇷 Tombik Döner
🇺🇸 Philly Cheesesteak
🇯🇵 Katsu Sando
🇿🇦 Gatsby
🇦🇷 Choripán
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
What do you think Colombia's next president should focus on first?
🔫
Guerrilla groups (47%)
💸
Ease of doing business (7%)
⚖️ Economic inequality (24%)
🇺🇸
Stabilising ties with US and neighbours (20%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (1%)
Your two cents:
🔫
C.S.C:
“You have to be in control to be in control.”
⚖️
M.T:
“If economic inequality is remedied, the guerrillas have no real reason for being.”
🇺🇸
W.C:
“The president needs to find incentives for farmers to grow productive crops. To do so, the president will need the support of the US and neighbours.”
👫
We’d love you to
join our group chat
—
become an Intrigue Insider today
!