URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/3-things-to-watch-in-iran
Title: 🌍 3 things to watch in Iran

In partnership with
Today’s briefing:
— 3 things to watch in Iran
— Go be an impact investor in Colombia
— Your new blast from the past
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. One of my favourite non-fiction reads from 2025 was the book ‘
Chokepoints
’ by former US diplomat and foreign policy expert, Edward Fishman. It explores how the US weaponises its dominance of the global economy to control critical economic nodes and exert power. Basically - rather than physical chokepoints, the book focuses on economic blockades.
But this week's
Iran conflict
has highlighted how much impact physical blockades can still have on the global economy, with key shipping routes like the Strait of Hormuz now effectively shut. The
flow-on impacts
from this are huge, not just because of the volume of global trade that passes through the narrow body of water, but also because of how many parties are dependent on this shipping lane.
Let’s dive into all that and more in today’s top story.
Number of the day
12%
That’s how much South Korea’s main stock index plunged Wednesday, its worst single-day drop in history. As the Iran war continues, the crash reflects
a
) Korea’s heavy reliance on imported energy, and
b
) its over-leveraged retail investors getting margin called.
Third Gulf War
Again, with everything shifting so rapidly, here’s your quick recap since our last briefing:
Iran’s
retaliatory strikes have continued, scoring non-lethal drone hits on the US consulate in Dubai, the US embassy in Riyadh, and potentially the CIA station in Riyadh, plus a ballistic strike on Qatar’s Al Udeid air base, and even two ports in Oman! We say ‘even’ because Oman (as host of Iran-US talks) had previously avoided the fray as the main Arab state not dunking on Iran.
The US
has closed more embassies (Kuwait, Lebanon, Saudi Arabia), while reporting it’s now hit a total of ~2,000 targets.
Israel
has struck targets linked to the Basij (Iran’s internal paramilitary) and the Assembly of Experts (the clerical body choosing the next supreme leader), hoping to disrupt succession and gut the regime’s symbols of power. It’s also (with the US) damaged Tehran’s 15th-century Golestan Palace, prompting an Iranian complaint to UNESCO.
And elsewhere
, the UAE’s leader (MBZ) has made a cameo at
Dubai
Mall in an attempt to project an air of normalcy now that local Iranian drone strikes seem to have slowed. Meanwhile,
Syria
is reinforcing its border with Lebanon after Israel moved to seize more Lebanese turf, claiming a buffer against Hezbollah attacks.
So with that quick update, here are the three things you need to track ahead:
The Strait of Hormuz
If 2024 was the year of the Red Sea, and 2025 was the year of the Panama Canal, 2026 is shaping up as the year of Hormuz:
It’s the tiny (33km/21mi-wide) entrance to the Persian Gulf, wedged between Iran and Oman, and serving as
a massive chokepoint
for ~20% of the world’s oil to get from Saudi Arabia, Iraq, the UAE, Kuwait and Iran out to world markets.
So the regime’s survival strategy has always been to
blockade
the Strait and hold the world ransom. In turn, the US strategy (such as it is) has always been to nail Iran’s navy.
And while the US has now destroyed Iran’s naval HQ and much of its heavier fleet,
hundreds of smaller fast-craft
are still (per IRGC doctrine) dispersed along the coast in coves, sheds, small ports, mobile trailers, etc. So the reality is Iran still poses an asymmetric threat against any tankers trying to make a dash.
And that’s where we are: absent a ceasefire or capitulation,
it’ll take weeks
to locate and destroy enough of those fast-boats, if that’s even possible without ground forces.
In the meantime…
Iraq
has already cut its oil output because it’s run out of storage space, and
Major maritime
insurers
have re-priced or halted war-risk coverage in the area.
The result is a fifth of the world’s oil now frozen. Trump has greenlit
naval escorts
and ordered the US Development Finance Corporation to
offer insurance
, but let’s add that to the list of things that might’ve been good to line up before pulling the trigger.
The Houthis
The Iran-backed Houthis had their moment blocking the Red Sea through 2024, though they fired up again last July (sinking two container ships) and September (sinking another).
Why the recent pause?
Believe it or not, it’s mostly a political decision linked to the Gaza ceasefire, rather than (say) Western navies frying all the Houthi drones and missiles.
So the Houthis can smash that ‘un-pause’ button at any moment — for now they’re just condemning US/Israeli aggression and calling for pro-ayatollah demonstrations, but there are rumours the group’s leadership is split on how to proceed, between either…
a
) hold fire but lose cred among the base, or
b
) pull the trigger again but face more foreign blowback.
If they announce option b), that’s another ~19% of east-west global shipments on hold.
Iran’s internal dynamic
This is the most critical vector, but also the toughest to track.
Trump and Bibi have both openly called for the Iranian people to overthrow the regime, though history suggests that’s tough while
the regime controls the armoury and treasury
. And contrary to hopes of some split within the regime, there are widespread reports the ayatollah’s (
corrupt
) son is now Iran’s new supreme leader.
Meanwhile, there’s also a line doing the rounds that there’s
never been modern regime change via an air-only war
, though Milošević and Gaddafi might like a word on the way an air campaign can still enable (if not drive) regime change.
And yet the thing is, Milošević faced political opposition while Gaddafi faced
armed
opposition. And right now, Iran’s mullahs face neither.
That’s where
Iran’s Kurds
come in, amid rumours of talks with the US and Israel:
Israeli strikes have already flattened several key security posts in Iran’s west
Kurdish leaders say the CIA is working on getting them arms and intel, and
US outlets say it’s all now pending a decision by President Trump.
But some of these Kurdish groups are already armed, leaving us to wonder if these leaks are just to provoke the regime to trigger a civil war. Either way, it all potentially tosses a match onto
a whole new dumpster fire
— not just sectarian but regional, irking and destabilising others with a big Kurdish presence (Iraq, Turkey, Syria, etc).
Oh, and given the US only just abandoned
Syria’s
main armed Kurdish faction a couple of weeks ago, and DC seemingly only just started re-advertising for Kurdish-speakers last week, this feels like another plan that could’ve usefully been lined up in advance.
Intrigue’s Take
Vibes are elusive creatures, but there’s a distinct vibe shift underway from ‘crikey they hit the whole leadership team’ to ‘oh that escalated fast’. There’s also a
vibe shift playing out among allies
, whether it’s…
Conflicting claims around DC being dragged into an Israeli move here
Conflicting claims of who sourced the key ayatollah intel (Israel vs the CIA), or
An early backer like Canada’s Carney now clarifying that his support for those initial strikes wasn’t a blank cheque for the mess that now seems to be unfolding.
So while those vibes shift, this war comes down to a test of endurance:
The Iranian regime’s
strategy is still to maximise the costs on its foes across casualties, the economy, basing, alliances — anything — until its foes back down. Its daily missile launches have collapsed ~85%, but cheaper drone attacks persist.
And likewise,
Trump
will keep pivoting until he declares victory, either because of a break in the regime, or due to a break in something he values (like oil prices, equity markets, opinion polls, or air defences).
On that last one, he’s
arguing
there’s no munitions shortage, but hauling defence CEOs for an emergency White House chat hardly instils confidence. So even if Iran’s regime crumbles, it might be at the cost of America’s own aura of invincibility.
Sound even smarter:
Yesterday’s reports of the US mulling the relocation of its Korea-based THAAD air defence turned out to stem from a mistranslation of an analyst’s headline. The fact it still blew up hints at the jitters among US allies.
Today’s briefing is presented by…
Become An AI Expert In Just 5 Minutes
If you’re a decision maker at your company, you need to be on the bleeding edge of, well, everything. But before you go signing up for seminars, conferences, lunch ‘n learns, and all that jazz, just know there’s a far better (and simpler) way:
Subscribing to The Deep View.
This daily newsletter condenses everything you need to know about the
latest and greatest AI developments
into a 5-minute read. Squeeze it into your morning coffee break and before you know it, you’ll be an expert too.
Subscribe right here
. It’s totally free, wildly informative, and trusted by 600,000+ readers at Google, Meta, Microsoft, and beyond.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇨🇳
CHINA — Two Sessions, one man.
China’s annual political-legislative ‘Two Sessions’ kick off today (Wednesday) to announce new growth targets and the next five-year plan. (
CNA
)
Comment
:
These events (the Chinese People’s Political Consultative Conference and the 3,000-strong National People’s Congress) are more choreographed than Bring It On 5, but still offer glimpses into China’s opaque ruling party. We’ll keep you posted.
🇪🇨
ECUADOR — New operation.
Declining to offer further details, the US and Ecuador say they’ve launched a new joint military operation against the resurgent drug cartels in Ecuador, a major transhipment route out of Colombia and Peru. It’s just four months since voters blocked a referendum to re-authorise foreign (US) bases. (
Guardian
)
🇮🇳
INDIA — Must read.
Censorship speculation is raging over the fate of
Four Stars of Destiny
, an explosive memoir by India's former army chief. It apparently alleges Delhi left the army without clear directives during the 2020 India-China border standoff, but it’s not available anywhere, and Penguin Random House has deleted a 2023 tweet announcing it was ready for pre-order. (
The Straits Times
)
🇪🇸
SPAIN — From friend to fast foe.
Prime Minister Sánchez has hit back at President Trump’s trade threats amid Madrid’s refusal to allow US strikes from local bases. Labelling Trump’s Iran war a “
disaster
”, Sánchez reiterated, "
we're not going to be complicit in something that's bad for the ​world nor contrary ​to our ⁠values and interests simply to avoid reprisals from someone
". (
Politico
)
Comment:
One of the many lessons from this conflict, particularly where partners are sidelined, is that an alliance is not the same as acquiescence.
🇳🇿
NEW ZEALAND — Talking heads.
The governing coalition has advanced a bill to make English an official language alongside Māori and New Zealand Sign Language. Supporters argue it corrects a legal anomaly, while critics say it’s unnecessary for such a dominant language. (
Guardian
)
Comment:
West Wing nerds will recall there was a whole episode on this, culminating in the line that you don’t need a law to protect the language of Shakespeare.
🇹🇹
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO — 911.
Port of Spain has declared another 15-day state of emergency, expanding police powers amid the latest surge in violent crime. The last ~seven-month decree just expired at the end of January, but gang shootouts and reprisals soon resumed. (
AP
)
Comment:
The country’s major LNG, methanol, and ammonia facilities are mostly in low-crime industrial zones, so international disruptions are unlikely.
🇨🇲
CAMEROON — Trouble abroad.
Belgian authorities have detained four suspected leaders of the Ambazonia separatist movement active in English-speaking parts of francophone Cameroon. The war crimes charges suggest they weren’t just raising funds, but also directing operations from Belgium. (
BBC
)
Comment:
It’s not just a reminder of this whole conflict (~6,000 casualties and 900,000 displaced since 2016), but also the value of cross-border collaboration: the investigation started after a tip from Norwegian (and possibly US) authorities.
Extra Intrigue
The Intrigue jobs board is back
💼
Director, BD @
US-India Strategic Partnership Forum
in DC
Political Affairs Officer @
UN Office for Disarmament Affairs
in Geneva
Advisory Fellow @
iGravity
in Bogotá, Colombia
Partnership Delegate
@
Danish Red Cross
in Kyiv
Dinosaur of the day
Credits: Joopiter.
Jealous that Jenny from accounts got that outdoor pizza oven, or Barry from HR snagged that fancy fire pit?
It’s time you one-upped them both by purchasing the full 7ft tall triceratops above. Unearthed in Wyoming in 1993, it’s now available for viewing by private appointment in Singapore until the end of this month, before it goes to auction via Joopiter.
And yes, Joopiter is the online auction house founded by Grammy-winning musician and producer, Pharrell Williams. They’re expecting a sale of $5M or more.
Today’s poll
What geopolitical knock-on effect from this Iran conflict worries you the most?
💧 Regional destabilisation
🛢️ Shocks to energy markets
📈 Rising costs for the US and its allies
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
If you were a US ally in the region, how would you respond right now?
🙅
This is Trump's war, he's on his own (41%)
🚀
The war is now hitting us, so best to help the US end it (56%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (3%)
Your two cents:
🚀
W.L:
“Plans have been formulating for some time now - if Trump needed help he should have filled strategic allies in on an attack in advance.”
🙅
E.C:
“I'd choose ‘help’ if I had any idea what the US goals were or what ‘end it’ might mean...”
✍️ S.G:
“Carefully calibrated ‘assistance’ or ‘support’ may be the wisest course of action unless deliberate Iranian attack on my soil occurs. The Iranians are well-positioned extra-territorially to exact revenge when least expected on civilian/domestic targets in-country.”
🚀
O.C:
“US allies should focus on convincing Trump to find an off-ramp before the US (and themselves) get stuck in an unwinnable ground war.”