URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/reduc-1408
Title: 🌍 4 spicy quotes on Greenland

Today’s briefing:
— Greetings from Davos!
— 4 spicy quotes on Greenland
— New geopolitical BFFs just dropped
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Did you read
our predictions edition
yesterday? I was the one who said crypto is one of the most underreported geopolitics stories out there, which raised eyebrows in our Intrigue WhatsApp community. But you know what? I’m doubling down.
Remember crypto’s founding promise? Decentralise money flows, democratise finance, and free citizens from omniscient governments. I was posted in China when Beijing treated crypto as an existential threat to the Communist Party itself.
And now? It’s been co-opted by just about everyone: by criminals from scammers to arms dealers, by yolo finance bros as a meme stock, by nations to quietly dollarise, by authoritarians to surveil you, and yes, it’s also a genuinely remarkable technology to build with.
But here’s my point: all of those things have huge implications for nation-states. Trump’s crypto-invested donors surely have his ear on regional affairs. Argentina might soon allow payments in stablecoins. Crypto is undoubtedly funding militias and terrorists. And so on. So yeah, crypto is one of the most underreported stories in “
geopolitics
.”
With my honour successfully defended, let’s wade into
Europe’s response on Greenland
.
PS -
¿Hablas español?
¡Check out
our weekly edition in Spanish
!
Davos Dispatch: Day 1
Clockwise from top-right: USA house in Davos, Pinterest pop-up, the view from above.
Aaah the World Economic Forum. In between engineering pandemics, rigging the Oscars, and forcing us to eat bugs, they somehow still find time to host thousands of world leaders and business elites (plus us!) in a tiny ski resort in the middle of Switzerland.
So we’ve braved the chilly temps, eye-watering prices, and absolute flood of puffer-jackets to deliver you another first-hand account of the year’s most exclusive forum.
Here’s a quick recap from
Davos day 1
:
The only thing more oppressive than the traffic has been
the choppers
, as VVIPs arrive: today (Tuesday) it’s He (
🇨🇳
), von der Leyen (
🇪🇺
), Macron (
🇫🇷
), and Carney (
🇨🇦
); then there’s Trump, Milei (
🇦🇷
), and Spain’s shockingly handsome Sanchez on Wednesday, followed by Merz (
🇩🇪
) and Prabowo (
🇮🇩
) on Thursday. Hours ago, organisers finally cancelled Iran’s foreign minister over the protest massacres.
On the ground, there’s real worry about
a US takeover
of Greenland (see below), adding more urgency to Europe’s push for strategic independence.
Finland’s Stubb noted his biggest fear is Greenland
taking up all the oxygen in Davos
, leaving none to halt Putin’s attacks on Ukraine — and in a spicy aside missed by outlets, he even floated the possibility this distraction is deliberate.
As for the
official
theme? Technically, it’s… (sorry, just had to yawn) “
A Spirit of Dialogue
”, though a quick look at the program shows
AI is king
: there are sessions on AI and media, AI and workforces, AI and <
insert your country>.
There’s a joke among diplomats about how the easiest way to double your cable readership is to somehow jam ‘
China
’ into the title. And yet guess what’s pretty absent from this latest Davos agenda? Yep, China (and Asia more generally), a curious omission given the region’s heft.
The
Saudis and Emiratis
are also quieter this year, though that’s partly because they’re busy hustling to establish
themselves
as a more compelling hub for elites.
Meanwhile, President Trump is reportedly bringing the biggest-ever US delegation. And given world leaders instinctively flock like the salmon of Capistrano, a record
65+ other leaders
have now confirmed too.
In fact, the whole summit is expecting
record-breaking attendance
, just a year after everyone was eulogising the world’s elitist and globalist event in an age of populism and nationalism. So maybe Davos is just adapting rather than dying.
To leave or take.
This Greenland story keeps (d)evolving, so here are the top four quotes you should know:
“On Greenland, the right way to approach an issue of this seriousness is through calm discussion between allies”
—
Sir Keir Starmer, UK Prime Minister
Off-ramps. Dialogue. Closed doors. That’s Starmer’s approach to Trump 2.0, and
reportedly
produced a Trump concession that the US leader might’ve gotten “
bad information
” about NATO’s Greenland exercises, after Starmer insisted these were just a response to Trump’s
Arctic
concerns. That’s the closest to de-escalation we’ve seen.
But as for the
Danish owners
of Greenland? Foreign Minister Rasmussen emerged from closed-door talks with his US counterpart (Rubio) and VP Vance last week, dragging deeply on a carpark ciggie before noting it's clear Trump has a
“wish of conquering Greenland”.
The shocked Danes are now ditching this week’s Davos (where Trump is due)
.
“Considering your Country decided not to give me the Nobel Peace Prize for having stopped 8 Wars PLUS, I no longer feel an obligation to think purely of Peace”
—
Donald J. Trump, US President
Imagine getting that text from the US president. Trump fired it off to Norway’s PM after the Norwegians and Finns proposed
a call to de-escalate
. The phone call idea might’ve landed better if coming directly from Finland’s Stubb (who Trump famously likes).
Still, the short exchange purports to spell out both Trump’s
end-game
(“
Complete and Total Control of Greenland
”) and
justifications
: a) this Nobel snub, b) protect Greenland from China and Russia, c) questioning Denmark’s legal ownership, and d) NATO owes us.
So how are others responding to all this…?
"We simply want to try to resolve this problem together, and the American government knows that we could also retaliate"
—
Friedrich Merz, German Chancellor
The US holds more cards, but the
Europeans can inflict pain
— we saw that in the anti-coercion package they cooked up (then shelved) amid last year’s US-EU trade talks: this could again target Trump’s base, whether via the tech broligarchs or products like Harley-Davidsons and bourbon (Jim Beam halted output at its main Kentucky site last month).
But we’re already seeing the
risks for Europe
, too — Germany’s Merz is reportedly wary of pulling that particular trigger given Germany’s own export exposure to the US.
Meanwhile, a top Deutsche Bank exec has flagged the possibility of Europe retaliating by
selling its US stocks and bonds
, though most of those assets are in private funds.
As for China…?
“
We urge the US side to stop using the so-called ‘China threat’ as a pretext to pursue selfish gains
”
— China’s foreign ministry spokesman Guo Jiakun
It was Napoleon (not Sun Tzu) who famously quipped to “
never interrupt your enemy when he is making a mistake
”, but it seems Mr Guo just couldn’t help himself.
Intrigue’s Take
We’ve previously
explored
the strategic reasons why US leaders have looked longingly at Greenland for more than a century, but
the only winners
in this latest approach might end up being the two autocrats Trump says he’s trying to stop: whether Putin or Xi, they now get to watch while the very thing they lack and fear (a vast alliance network) wobbles under the weight of a needless crisis that arguably just normalises (and distracts from) their own rogue territorial ambitions:
Recall the US can already jam Greenland with bases under its existing treaty, and
If this is about Russia (as the US president just tweeted), why use the kiddie gloves on the Russians in Ukraine, let alone invite Putin to the Gaza peace board? And why are Putin’s ultra-nationalists like Dugin tweeting gleefully about all this transatlantic disunity rather than fretting about getting outplayed in the Arctic?
We try to rise above each day’s hyperbole to explore the bigger picture, but it’s hard to see this just blowing over in Europe, even if the mid-terms end up clipping Trump’s wings — some within his party are already warning these Greenland headlines won’t help.
Sound even smarter:
Keep an eye on US markets reopening today (Tuesday) after MLK Day, with US bond yields already spiking in early Asia trading — it’s part of a broader global selloff as rattled markets grapple with the prospect of a revived US-EU trade war.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇷🇺
RUSSIA
-
Putin on the board.
President Trump has confirmed Kremlin reports that Trump invited his Russian counterpart to join Gaza’s new ‘Board of Peace’. (
Guardian
)
Comment
:
This new Board has struggled to get on its feet — the job itself (Gaza’s future) is tough enough, then add the reported billion dollar entrance fee, and now throw a war criminal like Putin in the mix? Still, apparently Morocco’s king is firming up as the Board’s next member — he’ll feel a debt of gratitude after Trump 1.0 recognised Morocco’s claims over Western Sahara.
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
Important numbers.
Two key numbers have emerged out of China this week: first, birth rates declined 17% to a new record low in 2025. And second, authorities claim the economy still hit its 5% growth target despite a Q4 slowdown and weak domestic demand. (
AP
)
🇯🇵
JAPAN
-
Snap election.
Prime Minister Takaichi has called a snap election for 8 February, just three months after her party first elevated her to the top gig. (
Japan Times
)
Comment
: It’s a bet her remarkably high approvals will not only deliver her a stronger mandate and a wider majority, but also a big rebuke to China’s naked efforts to tank her hawkish tenure before it gets too entrenched.
🇵🇹
PORTUGAL
-
Runoff election.
The left’s António José Seguro has won the most votes in Sunday’s presidential elections, edging out the right’s firebrand André Ventura. But with neither winning a majority, the two now go to a runoff on 8 February (busy day). (
Politico
)
🇻🇳
VIETNAM
-
Leave your phone outside.
Vietnam’s Communist Party has kicked off its five-yearly congress, with 1,600 delegates likely to rubber-stamp incumbent To Lam’s bid to consolidate power (
Reuters
)
Comment
:
Security is unusually tight even by Vietnam standards — to us, that reflects the Party’s years of quiet instability at the top, with head honchos jamming phone signals to thwart any rival cliques as much as any foreign eavesdroppers.
🇸🇾
SYRIA
-
Ceasefire signed.
Syria’s government has signed a 14-point deal with the country’s main Kurdish faction (the SDF) after two weeks of fighting in which the Kurds lost huge swathes of the northeast, where they’d been a US ally against ISIS. (
Washington Post
$)
Comment
: This is a stunning defeat for the Kurds, though one encouraging sign is Syria’s administration paired its military offensive with a conciliatory decree recognising Kurdish as a national language. Still, Syria’s Kurds will need more than words to feel safe under al-Sharaa’s rule.
🇬🇹
GUATEMALA
-
State of emergency.
President Arévalo has announced a 30-day state of emergency after gang-led prison riots left eight police officers dead while demanding a transfer to lower-security prisons. (
Guardian
)
Comment
: Anti-corruption campaigner Arévalo took power against the odds in 2024, overcoming an establishment determined to keep him out. Two years on, this story is a brutal reminder of just some of what he’s up against.
Extra Intrigue
Here’s what people around the world are googling
🇮🇹
Italians
are searching for ‘
Valentino
’ after legendary fashion designer
Valentino Garavani died
, aged 93.
Folks in
🇨🇱
Chile
googled ‘
Airbus A400 M Atlas
’ after a British Royal Air Force military transport made a
stopover at a Chilean military base
.
🇦🇺
Australians
looked up ‘
Manly shark attack
’ after a swimmer was injured at Sydney’s famous Manly beach, the city’s
third shark attack in two days
.
Photo of the day
Credits: Giorgia Meloni via Twitter/X.
While AI works to cure cancer, we’ll keep using it to add mullets to world leaders or turn ourselves into Studio Ghibli characters.
Italy’s Giorgia Meloni just caught up on that latter trend, snapping the above pic with Japan’s Takaichi Sanae and converting it to Japan’s famous manga style for... fun?
As for Japan’s PM, she’s been on a roll lately, and even rocked a surprise K-pop drum duet with her Korean counterpart last week.
Soft power is partly just about being likeable. And honestly dear Intriguer, who doesn’t love ‘toons and drums?
Today’s poll
What do you think of Europe's response on Greenland?
💪 Strong, it'll make Trump back off
😨 Weak, Trump will double down
✍️ Other (write us!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
What type of year do you think we'll have?
😴
Pretty calm, everything already "happened" (1%)
⚡ We'll have some shocks, but a lot of consolidating (15%)
🥵
Get ready for some unprecedented times (82%)
✍️ Other (write in your prediction!) (2%)
Your two cents:
🥵
M.S:
“Military build-up and gold prices say everyone smells smoke.”
Your predictions:
J:
“Trump cannot afford to lose the House, and he might use every trick to skip the midterms.”
T.J.H:
“Epstein files will be the ‘October surprise’ before the midterms.”
J.B:
“There'll be a lot of "
small
" wars in certain regions, nothing big enough to be termed World War 3, I hope.”
M.R:
“Taiwan will be safe until 2027.“