URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/4-tales-to-watch-this-week
Title: 🌍 4 tales to watch this week

Today’s briefing:
— 4 tales to watch this week
— Why Swedes are googling ‘Duplantis’
— Why Maduro jumped the Christmas gun
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Do you know what Millennials love more than a side part and skinny jeans? A listicle.
For those who don’t know what that vaguely rude-looking/sounding word means, a listicle is an article structured as a numbered or bulleted list which combines the ‘list’ and ‘article’ formats to present content in an easily digestible way. These pieces often used clickbaity numerical headlines, like "
Top 10 Most Attractive G20 Leaders
”, to grab readers.
What better time than today to whip that format back out, as we dive into
the four most intriguing issues we’re watching this week
.
Number of the day
$3T
That’s the new market cap reached by Alphabet, Google’s parent company, with the tech giant now joining the exclusive $3T club alongside Nvidia, Microsoft, and Apple.
The fall sprint
Northern hemisphere Intriguers will feel that Fall mood in the air: maybe it’s the waft of Pumpkin Spice Latte. Folks down south of the equator will be feeling those Spring vibes: it’s probably all that pomegranate & rose espresso tonic you’re smashing.
Whatever your brew, there’s now an end-of-year sprint on, and this is what we’re tracking:
The Fed
We’re almost certain to see this year’s
first US rate cut tomorrow
(Wednesday) in welcome news for both the White House and investors, even if it’s already priced in.
But markets will also be watching for
any hints
of stagflation, dissent around the data, and global spillover (the US is already an outlier, resuming cuts just as peers hit pause).
Meanwhile, any signalling of
bigger-than-expected
cuts could rattle markets, with the implicit message that the Fed now feels late (or… markets could just say
yay
and let rip).
And of course, everyone wants word on what’s up with board member
Lisa Cook
— a court has temporarily blocked President Trump’s attempt to fire her, and there’s
reporting
that the underlying fraud allegations were off. It’ll all shape when Trump can get a Fed majority, presumably more likely to let the economy run hot.
Zapad 2025
That’s the name of the joint
Russia-Belarus military exercises
(‘zapa’ means ‘west’) held every four years, with the latest iteration actually wrapping in Belarus today (Tuesday). You’ll recall the last time Putin held these drills, he used them as cover for his mass 2021 build-up near Ukraine before then invading (after repeatedly claiming he wouldn’t).
Three things we’ve noticed this time around?
First
, the
messaging
, with the Russians and Belarusians claiming these are scaled-down drills to reduce tensions with NATO next door. That’s likely just spin for the fact that…
Second
, Putin simply doesn’t have the
manpower
, with maybe a few thousand Russian troops turning up this year, down from as many as
200,000
in 2021.
And
third
, the
spectators
, which included the usual mix of Moscow-friendly dictatorships, but with a very notable addition: two US officials were there, too. It’s part of the curious US-Belarus dance now underway, with the US trading sanctions relief for political prisoner releases, though DC’s end-game is unclear — there’s talk of it somehow helping peace talks, though maybe it’s also to cleave Minsk away from Moscow?
69th IAEA General Conference
That’s the UN nuclear watchdog’s big annual meeting in Vienna this week, with all the usual players gearing up for a familiar fight:
US
energy chief Chris Wright is
calling
for Iran’s uranium-enrichment programme to be “
completely dismantled
”
Iran
’s nuclear chief Mohammad Eslami is pushing members to label the earlier US-Israeli strikes on Iranian sites a breach of international law, and…
IAEA
boss Rafael Grossi
is just urging everyone to
recommit
to the rules.
Grossi, of course, also tries to thread this with one eye on the possibility he could end up the next secretary-general of the UN (the selection process is due to start by December).
Anyway, even if the above feels like
Groundhog Day
, the fact everyone is sending their top envoys is a reminder our embattled multilateral system is still the only game in town.
An end to the TikTok saga?
With each US stay-of-execution for TikTok, the legal basis for its continued US presence has just gotten weaker and weaker (the legislation never intended so many extensions).
But word is
there might now be a deal
, with Presidents Trump and Xi due to give it their blessing on Friday. The big question is whether it strikes a meaningful balance between preserving the platform’s massive social and economic value for the US, against the real risks that come with such a powerful tool answering (via a China-based parent) to Beijing.
There’s not enough public info yet, though rumours are this deal does involve US owners taking control, and TikTok’s coveted algorithm getting transferred to new US owners via a licensing agreement. If this is the case, it might explain why Beijing still sounds a little salty about the whole thing, warning the US against further “
suppression
” of Chinese firms.
Intrigue’s Take
What big themes might we draw from all this? Here are two.
First
, whether it’s about the TikTok algorithm, central bank independence, IAEA credibility, or Russia’s latest war games, they all point to
a yawning trust gap
in our new world.
But second
, whether it’s the Fed, the IAEA, or any other body creaking
under pressure
, they’re arguably now more central than ever, with capitals still hanging on every word.
Two other events we’re tracking:
Qatar just wrapped an
emergency Arab-Islamic summit
, seeking a dash of solidarity in the wake of Israel’s strikes on Hamas members in Doha last week.
China’s 12th Beijing Xiangshan Forum kicks off tomorrow (Wednesday) — it’s China’s answer to the annual Shangri-La Dialogue in Singapore (the Indo-Pacific’s must-attend event for security and intelligence types).
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
The European Correspondent
Stay informed on Europe – in 11 minutes
Essential stories shaping Europe, delivered to your inbox daily. The European Correspondent delivers independent news from Lisbon to Kyiv, Tbilisi to Reykjavik, told by local journalists who live the stories they cover. We cut through the noise with sharp analysis, compelling data stories, and investigative reports. In just 11 minutes a day, you’ll understand the politics, culture, and social shifts driving Europe forward. No spin. No paywall. Just honest, nonprofit journalism, built for everyone across the globe.
Subscribe for free!
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇮🇱
ISRAEL
-
Critical report.
A UN-commissioned inquiry has accused Israel of committing four of international law’s five genocidal acts against Palestinians in Gaza. Israel rejects the findings, arguing it’s Hamas that attempted genocide in Israel. Meanwhile, Israel has now launched its ground operation into Gaza City, describing it as necessary to destroy Hamas military infrastructure in the area. (
BBC
)
🇦🇺
AUSTRALIA
-
Mutual defence.
Neighbours Australia and Papua New Guinea are due to sign a mutual defence pact this week during PNG’s 50th anniversary of independence. It’s part of Australia’s efforts to strengthen Pacific security ties and counter a more assertive China. (
Taipei Times
)
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
No quarterlies.
The US president has reiterated his calls for companies to drop quarterly earnings reports, arguing a less-frequent schedule would “
save money, and allow managers to focus on properly running their companies
”. Critics argue it’d curb much-needed transparency. Any change would need the SEC’s blessing. (
CNBC
)
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
Foul play.
Beijing is (again) accusing US chipmaker Nvidia of breaching antitrust laws, though it’s declined to share further details at this stage. (
BBC
)
Comment
: China has previously used antitrust investigations as leverage — this latest news comes just as US-China trade talks resume, and days after the US added 23 Chinese firms to a list of companies restricted from buying certain American tech.
🇮🇳
INDIA
-
No formalities.
It’s hard to think of a bigger grudge match than India vs Pakistan cricket at
any
time, let alone after the two nuclear-armed foes just fought a brief war. But these neighbours just squared off at the cricket Asia Cup in the UAE, with India stirring controversy by skipping the customary handshake after its big win. (
NYT
$)
Comment
: Aside from the obvious nationalistic fervour playing out on the pitch, India’s cricket sector has close ties to government — the chair of cricket’s international governing body is the son of a powerful cabinet minister in India (Shah).
🇮🇪
IRELAND
-
Tapping out.
Former martial arts fighter Conor McGregor has dropped out of Ireland’s race for the (largely ceremonial) presidency after polling at less than 2%. (
Politico
)
Comment
: The specifics of any candidacy aside, it’s a reminder of the gap between online hype and real life. Touch grass.
🇬🇶
EQUATORIAL GUINEA
-
No internet for you.
Residents of an island off the coast of Equatorial Guinea are accusing the government of imposing a one-year internet ban as punishment after they complained about a Moroccan construction firm using too much dynamite. (
AP
)
Extra Intrigue
Here’s what people around the world are googling:
Folks in
🇭🇰
Hong Kong
searched for ‘
tsla
’ (Tesla’s stock ticker) as news broke CEO Elon Musk has
bought $1B in stocks
(they’re up 85% since April).
🇦🇷
Argentine
TV fans googled ‘
The Pitt
’ after the medical drama
won ‘Best Drama’ at this year’s Emmy awards
.
And
🇸🇪
Swedish
sports fans looked up ‘
Duplantis
’ after their beloved pole vaulter Armand Duplantis won his third world title and
broke his 14th record
.
Celebration of the day
We obviously did this artwork ourselves (you’re so welcome).
Ever felt like the festive season keeps starting earlier and earlier? Starbucks dropping its gingerbread latte in September? Walmart rocking Jingle Bells in October?
Well Venezuela is dialling that up to 11 again this year, with local despot Nicolás Maduro announcing his country will again celebrate Christmas from 1 October.
We love Christmas, but you should know Maduro’s move is less about Christmas cheer, and more an attempt to win support among the faithful, and boost spending amid the malaise.
Today’s poll
What are you watching most closely this week?
(tell us why!)
☢️ IAEA conference
🤝 Arab-Islamic Summit
📲 TikTok sale
🏦 The Fed readout
🪖 Russia-Belarus drills
🇨🇳 Xiangshan Forum
🇲🇼 Malawi elections
Other (write us!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
What do you think this US deployment to the Caribbean is
most
about?
🏴‍☠️ Hitting the cartels (10%)
🇻🇪
Pressuring Maduro (50%)
🇬🇾
Backing Guyana (10%)
🌐
A new world order (20%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (8%)
Your two cents:
🇻🇪
R.N:
“It only makes sense that this is a pressure move since the U.S. has a bounty on his head. What is the actual cost of this deployment?”
✍️
B.B:
“OIL!!!!!!”
🇬🇾
G:
“It’s about showing we’re not afraid to flex some muscle in our own backyard. We’re totally showing indirect support for Guyana and warning Venezuela to behave.”