URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/5-lines-from-trump-s-un-speech
Title: 🌍 5 lines from Trump’s UN speech

Today’s briefing:
— Trump’s UN speech in 5 lines
— Wanna report the news in Seoul?
— A time capsule grips a nation
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. As far as speeches go, the ones delivered at the UN General Assembly (UNGA) are generally pretty vanilla. And very occasionally, you’d get one or two mic drops that upstage the rest, either through content, delivery, or (sometimes) stage props.
This year, we’ve already had quite a few spicy nuggets from world leaders, including a blazing dress down of Russia by Poland, some heated diplomatic remarks from Brazil, and of course, some UN smackdowns from the US.
Let’s dive into
UNGA 2025
.
Number of the day
65
That’s how many vehicles Timor-Leste’s government had planned to buy for local lawmakers, until student-led protests forced a U-turn last week. Intriguers will sense a regional trend, after similar upheavals in Nepal, Indonesia, Philippines, and beyond.
UN-der scrutiny
Whether you’re a fan or otherwise, Donald Trump’s UN General Assembly
remarks
had plenty of his trademark…
drama
(“
your countries are going to hell
”)
bromance
(“
at least for about 39 seconds, we had excellent chemistry
”)
real estate
(“
you walk on terrazzo, do you notice that?
”), and
fire
(“
these are the two things I got from the United Nations: a bad escalator and a bad teleprompter
” — both devices failed him on the day).
But when the leader of the world’s largest military and economy addresses the UN, the world still listens. So here are our five top quotes:
“
In a period of just seven months, I have ended seven unendable wars.
”
The president, who ran on a peacemaker platform, has used this line before, referring to his claims around
i
) Cambodia-Thailand,
ii
) India-Pakistan,
iii
) Israel-Iran,
iv
) Armenia-Azerbaijan,
v
) Congo-Rwanda,
vi
) Serbia-Kosovo, and
vii
) Egypt-Ethiopia.
Folks will of course test the details, but we’d just note Trump’s list reflects a key truth: even a US president re-elected to focus closer to home is now confronted with a world demanding
more
of America’s attention, as the only nation still with a global reach.
“The United Nations has tremendous, tremendous potential. But it's not even coming close to living up to that potential.”
Just about
everyone
would agree with that diagnosis. Even (especially?!) UN officials. The disagreement is more around the cure.
Mirroring his approach back home, President Trump has sought to squeeze any
UN bloat
(and mission creep) by slashing funding — others have followed suit for fiscal reasons.
But the result is the UN is now facing
3,000 job cuts and $500M
in budget cuts. And for an organisation confronting a fraying word order with a smaller budget than the NYPD ($3.7B vs $5.7B), that’ll hurt. Sure, it’ll drive some much-needed efficiency. But it’ll also mean (as the president himself saw) you get escalators and teleprompters that don’t work.
“
I think Ukraine, with the support of the European Union, is in a position to fight and WIN all of Ukraine back in its original form.”
Ok we’re cheating here because the president tweeted this
after
his UNGA address, which did include this brief aside about the Russo-Ukraine war, btw: “
Of the seven wars that I stopped, I thought it would be the easiest because of my relationship with President Putin.
”
Anyway,
maybe it’s just another tweet
— the president makes no mention of past US deadlines, for example. But for him to now suddenly ditch his persistent line that Putin can’t be beaten and that Ukraine can never get its land back? Wow. Russian stocks felt it too, immediately plunging across the board.
So what changed?
Maybe it’s Putin’s de-facto mockery of Trump’s ceasefire calls, or something from Trump’s meeting with Ukraine’s Zelensky after his speech. But our sense is this message probably reflects the briefings Trump is reportedly now getting from his advisors, confirming something we’ve been saying for a while now: sooner or later, Putin is screwed.
And President Trump has made no secret
he likes to back winners, not losers
. So maybe Ukraine’s tenacious self-defence has now inverted Trump’s view on who is who?
“It’s time to end the failed experiment of open borders”
The US president dedicated a chunk of his speech to
undocumented migration
, describing it as “
the number one political issue of our time
”. And Trump himself is arguably evidence of that — immigration issues not only played a key role in his two election victories; it’s actually still his policy with the highest approval (though down at 42%).
And yet, Trump’s target audience in Europe has changed since his first UN address in 2017, with most capitals now reflecting broadly similar strains of populist and nationalist public sentiment, even if individual leaders might choose their words differently.
“It’s the greatest con job perpetrated on the world”
Two things about the president weighing back in on
climate change
here:
first
, America’s energy transition now has its own momentum, with renewable investment up (even in Texas) despite any DC headwinds. These are cigar-chomping (not tree-hugging) decisions.
But
second
, that momentum is also getting accelerated by geopolitics: the US-China tech race needs chips, which need energy. That’s why Silicon Valley is now scrambling for every joule it can get, with most of Big Tech’s new energy contracts now tied to renewables — at this point, Zuck & Co aren’t doing this for the PR points. They want to win.
Intrigue’s Take
Zooming out from Trump’s longest-ever UN address (56 minutes), here are three bigger picture reflections on what it all says about the US, China, and the UN:
First
, it’s interesting to compare Trump’s fifth UN address with his first, which still featured classic
US
pledges of cooperation. The changes reflect not only a more confident (and fiery) president, but also a firmer conviction that multilateralism is less a US strength to leverage, and more a vulnerability to manage.
Second
, it’s interesting that while
China
has sought to cast itself in response as today’s more responsible and reliable multilateralist, Beijing hasn’t come close to filling the fiscal gaps left by US retrenchment. That looks to us like further proof that China is less about replacing the US, and more about displacing it.
And
third
, for
the UN
itself? This year’s General Assembly is unlikely to produce immediate solutions, but it might help crystallise the world’s understanding of just how dire the situation is. Yet diplomats always lean back on that line famously attributed to Madeleine Albright:
if the UN didn’t exist, we’d have to invent it
.
Sound even smarter:
Congress just confirmed Mike Waltz (the former national security advisor) as Trump’s ambassador to the UN.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇬🇧
UNITED KINGDOM
-
At ease?
Health officials from the EU, the UK, and elsewhere are advising that paracetamol is (within dosage and duration guidelines) safe during pregnancy, after President Trump argued there are links between Tylenol and autism. (
PBS
)
🇩🇰
DENMARK
-
Another day, another drone.
Large unidentified drones have closed the main airports in Copenhagen and Oslo, with Danish authorities saying the disruption bears the hallmarks of a “
capable actor
”. Local outlets are reporting investigators are looking at three suspicious ships that were present offshore at the time (all with links to Russia)
.
(
The Guardian
)
Comment:
The very public US-Denmark spat over Greenland might explain why a hostile actor would seek to target Copenhagen rather than some other US ally — it’s a low cost way to test (and fan local doubts around) US dependability.
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
No special treatment needed.
China has announced it’s no longer seeking
Special and Differential Treatment
under its developing country status at the WTO, a major shift long sought by the US. (
Straits Times
)
Comment:
This has the potential to breathe new life not only into US-China trade talks, but also broader WTO reform discussions due in Cameroon next year.
🇪🇺
EUROPEAN UNION
-
Tech tools.
Meta (of Facebook, Insta, and Whatsapp fame) is now allowing certain US allies like France, Germany, Italy, Japan, and South Korea — plus EU and NATO institutions — to use its Llama AI model for defence-related tasks, waiving old restrictions with DC’s blessing. (
Euractiv
)
Comment:
It’s interesting to see how many NatSec players — like the Pentagon, Anduril, and Palantir — are already building with Llama. That’s the benefit of going open-source (clients can download, fine-tune, then deploy without limits).
🇮🇩
INDONESIA
-
Done deal.
After 19 rounds and nine years of talks, Jakarta has finalised a trade deal with the EU to remove tariffs on most EU and Indonesian goods. (
Euronews
)
Comment:
It’s a reminder that, almost counter-intuitively, increased US tariffs will often lower tariffs elsewhere, as US trading partners rush to diversify. The fact the EU is allowing tariff-free palm oil from Indonesia also suggests Brussels might be prioritising economic over environmental resilience (though the two sides will apparently work to ensure compliance with the EU’s deforestation legislation).
🇧🇷
BRAZIL
-
Out of town.
It’s not every day a routine trip by a US diplomat abroad generates headlines back home, but Bloomberg is reporting the top US envoy in Brazil is headed to the COP30 host city of Belem for talks around Amazon deforestation. (
Bloomberg
)
Comment:
It’s generated US headlines because of the arguable dissonance with President Trump’s more climate-sceptical remarks at UNGA. But this Belem trip is really an extension of Trump’s America First approach: his team has long argued that illegal deforestation in Brazil gives farmers an unfair advantage over US competitors.
🇪🇬
EGYPT
-
Go free.
One of the most prominent figures from Egypt’s Arab Spring, dual British citizen Alaa Abd el-Fattah, has scored a presidential pardon from the Sisi administration, walking free after first getting jailed in 2014. (
AP
)
Comment:
This mix of harsh sentences and presidential pardons is partly an attempt to stifle dissent without just fanning more dissent.
Extra Intrigue
The Intrigue jobs board
💼
Trust and Integrity Intelligence Lead, Global Intelligence @
Google
in DC
Intern, Advisory Graduate Program @
PWC
in Milan
Programme Assistant, Ukraine @
Basil Institute on Governance
in Kyiv
Editor / Broadcaster
@
KBS English Service
in Seoul
Photo of the day
Credits: Michal Růžička, MAFRA
Ever wondered what historians look like when they work? Perhaps chewing thoughtfully on thick-rimmed glasses near a rich mahogany bookcase while sniffing an Americano?
Well according to the pic above, your glasses can be either on or off, but you
do
need gloves, particularly if you’re opening a 1930s-era letter from
Tomáš Garrigue Masaryk
. He was Czechoslovakia’s founding president, and someone handed his parting letter to today’s Czech archives back in 2005 on the condition they stay sealed for another 20 years.
That pledge expired last Friday, when practically the whole nation tuned in for a
live opening
of the letter — attendees even included President Petr Pavel, who we once famously described as looking like Tom Cruise playing ripped Santa. So what did the letter say? It contained Masaryk’s views on politics, mortality, humanity, and beyond.
Fun fact
: Much of the letter was in English, likely because his wife was born in the US.
Today’s poll
What do you think we should do to get the UN at its full potential?
💸 More funding
🏢 Streamline and consolidate
➕ Expand the Security Council
🚫 Abolish the veto
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Which foreign problem do you think Modi should tackle first?
🇸🇦
Reaffirming Saudi ties (5%)
🛃
Lobbying the US to reconsider its visas (19%)
📉
Lobbying the US to ease its tariffs (30%)
🇷🇺
Standing firm on its right to buy cheap Russian oil (8%)
🇵🇰
Stabilising ties with Pakistan (27%)
🇨🇳
Finalising its borders with China (8%)
✍️ Other (write us!) (3%)
Your two cents:
📉
E.K.M:
“More than important, tariff relief really just seems the most feasible.”
🇵🇰
D.C:
“Pakistan is India’s largest threat, period.”
🇷🇺
R.C:
“With China firmly cosied up to Pakistan and the US targeting Indian trade, Russia may soon become the only ‘superpower’ friend Modi has.”