URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/a-havana-syndrome-device
Title: 🌍 A Havana syndrome device?

Today’s briefing:
— Can a mystery device explain Havana Syndrome?
— A former president sentenced to death
— Forbidden love in Pyongyang
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. I’m often guilty of telling folks that I think the world peaked in the early to mid-2010s. Back then, social media was mainly filters and viral challenges, and PSY’s
Gangnam Style
was top of the charts. Yes, there were still geopolitical conflicts, but the world
felt
like it was trending in a positive direction.
Such is the beauty of nostalgia bias, under which one highlights the past’s positive memories while diminishing its negative ones. One of the nastier memories that I tend to gloss over from the 2010s (aside from skinny jeans) is
‘Havana Syndrome’
, a mysterious ailment that was the talk of the diplomatic community during my time in the foreign service.
Ten years on, there’s been some interesting developments. That’s our top story for today.
P.S.
Today’s newsletter will be
our last one for this week
. We’ll be taking a quick break for our team retreat this Thursday and Friday, and be back in your inboxes next Monday.
Intrigue Insight: Iran update
A quick update on the situation in Iran:
US President Donald Trump took to
social media
to tell Iranians to
“KEEP PROTESTING - TAKE OVER YOUR INSTITUTIONS!!!”
, adding
“HELP IS ON ITS WAY”
without clarifying further details on what the ‘help’ would entail.
US officials reportedly met with Reza Pahlavi, the son of the ousted former Shah, over the weekend. Pahlavi is angling to position himself as a potential transitional leader in case of the regime’s collapse.
Meanwhile, protests continue in Iran despite a violent crackdown. There’s no way to verify the number of casualties, but by most accounts it’s now squarely in the thousands, if not
tens of thousands
.
Elon Musk has reportedly made Starlink’s satellite service free for Iranians in an effort to combat the multi-day communication blackout imposed by the authorities.
Meanwhile, regional players watch on. The UAE’s Minister of Foreign Trade, Thani Al Zeyoudi, said that the US’s threat of 25% secondary tariffs for countries that trade with Iran has
“yet to be sorted.”
Quick Take
:
As we
wrote
on Monday, the regime’s collapse is not a foregone conclusion. But the longer these protests continue, the more precarious the regime’s position becomes, which could drive an even bloodier crackdown.
Mystery device
Picture it: a secluded hangar, a furtive handoff, goons with guns, suitcases bursting with cash. On one side, US operatives. On the other, sellers with a mysterious device that might finally explain Havana Syndrome.
You'll forgive our imaginations running a little wild there, but according to new reports from
CNN
, the source material is very much real: in the dying days of the Biden administration, a branch of the US Department of Homeland Security,
clandestinely purchased a device that could be the cause of Havana Syndrome
.
But first, some context…
For those who remember the 2010s, you may recall stories about Havana Syndrome —officially called Anomalous Health Incidents (AHIs) — a collection of neurological and other symptoms that hit US diplomats, spies, and their families around the world.
Those affected reportedly experienced a range of ailments, including dizziness, nausea, headaches, ringing in the ears, and dull pain.
The condition earned its nickname because the symptoms initially presented in US and Canadian officials who had worked in Cuba around 2016. Since then, hundreds of similar incidents have been recorded by US personnel posted at several locations, including Guangzhou, Vienna, Hanoi, Bogotá, and Tbilisi.
But here’s the puzzling bit: a decade on and we still don’t know what causes it.
Years of studies have produced three competing theories:
Environmental factors
— perhaps exposure to toxic chemicals or other hazards. But this isn't supported by medical data, and the symptoms have appeared in locations with nothing in common.
A directed-energy weapon
— most likely Russian. A
2020 study
found symptoms "
consistent with directed, pulsed radio frequency energy.
" And a
2024 investigation
by The Insider, 60 Minutes, and Der Spiegel linked a Russian military intelligence unit to suspected attacks.
Psychogenic factors
— stress, anxiety, or other natural causes.
A 2025 National Intelligence Council report
leaned this way, concluding it's "
very unlikely
" a foreign adversary is responsible, or even has a weapon capable of causing the symptoms.
The CIA sits somewhere in the middle of these assessments:
an unreleased 2022 assessment
dismissed the idea of a large conspiracy, but
couldn't rule out foreign involvement in around two dozen cases.
Now back to this intriguing device…
According to CNN’s unnamed sources, acquiring the device cost the US “eight figures.” It is reportedly small enough to fit into a backpack, has Russian components, and produces pulsed radio waves.
Those suffering from Havana Syndrome are hoping they might finally learn what happened to them, but the US has now had the device for a year and is seemingly no closer to solving the mystery.
Intrigue’s Take
Havana Syndrome has become a bit of an obsession in the US intelligence community.
For those affected,
there's been a push for official recognition. Then-President Biden passed legislation to compensate those suffering from Havana Syndrome, but many remain unsatisfied by how the situation has been handled — including being publicly told the condition might just be in their heads.
Beyond the human toll,
any direct evidence of a foreign power purposefully harming US officials abroad would be a serious diplomatic incident, at best, and a reason for a military response at worst.
But perhaps most importantly, isn't the US supposed to be the one inventing futuristic weapons and innovative methods of hurting its adversaries? Of course, trying to prove a negative is nearly impossible, but the fact that, nearly a decade later the mystery remains unsolved is an unnerving shortcoming of technological and intelligence capabilities.
Sound even smarter:
An important caveat: we only know what's been made public. There'd be significant intelligence value in the US not revealing what it actually knows.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇨🇳
CHINA  — Don’t buy those chips.
Chinese customs authorities have reportedly banned the entry of Nvidia’s H200 chips into China, while Chinese tech companies were told not to purchase the chips unless strictly necessary. (
Reuters
)
Comment:
The Trump administration officially approved the sale of H200 chips to China just this week, but it seems like Beijing isn’t keen to have its companies rush to place orders. It could be a strategy to build leverage ahead of trade talks with the US, a move to force players into buying domestic semiconductors, or both.
🇨🇷
COSTA RICA — Assassination plot foiled.
Costa Rica’s authorities are investigating an alleged plot to assassinate President Rodrigo Chaves ahead of February’s elections. Chaves is not eligible for reelection. (
Tico Times
)
🇰🇷
SOUTH KOREA — A death sentence for the former president.
South Korean prosecutors have asked the Seoul Central District Court to sentence former president Yoon Suk Yeol to death on insurrection charges over his failed December 2024 martial law decree, which ultimately led to his removal from office. (
NBC
)
Comment:
A three-judge panel is expected to hand down its verdict on 19 February. Despite the prosecutor’s request for a death sentence, the court is more likely to impose life imprisonment: South Korea hasn’t carried out an execution in three decades, and Yoon’s death at the hands of the state risks further political polarisation.
🇵🇱
POLAND  — That’s gonna cost you.
Poland risks millions in EU fines after President Karol Nawrocki vetoed the EU’s Digital Services Act, reigniting both a rule-of-law clash with Brussels and political turmoil at home. (
Politico
)
🇻🇪
VENEZUELA
— Mother María.
Venezuelan opposition leader María Corina Machado met privately with Pope Leo XIV at the Vatican on Monday, urging him to press for the release of political prisoners and support a democratic transition in Venezuela. (
AP
)
Comment:
Venezuela is predominantly Catholic, so papal support for her agenda will carry weight, even if the gesture is largely symbolic.
🇻🇳
VIETNAM — Made in Hanoi.
Google is reportedly shifting its manufacturing operations from China to Vietnam, aiming to produce its high-end smartphones in the Southeast Asian country. (
Nikkei
)
Comment:
This was only a matter of time, as Google now follows other big tech manufacturers (including Apple) in moving their manufacturing capabilities to Vietnam in an effort to reduce their reliance on Chinese manufacturers.
🇺🇬
UGANDA — Blackout.
Uganda's communications regulator has ordered an internet shutdown ahead of Thursday's election, citing security concerns. The 81-year-old, long-reigning president Yoweri Museveni faces 43-year-old popstar Bobi Wine in a tense rematch of the 2021 election, which saw widespread protests, dozens killed, and a week-long internet blackout. (
BBC
)
Extra Intrigue
Intrigue Job Board
💼
Defence Analyst
@
International Institute for Strategic Studies
in London
Economic Advisor
@
Embassy of Switzerland
in Washington, DC
Research Manager
@
Good Business Lab
in Colombia
Human Rights Policy Advisor @
Irish mission to the UN
, in NYC
Movie recommendation of the day
Credits: Letterboxd.
“The Square”:
When a real-life Swedish diplomat returned from his posting in Pyongyang, North Korea, the press were expecting tales of intrigue from inside the reclusive Hermit Kingdom. Instead, he told them his time there was simply “
so lonely
” and his only way to relieve stress was biking around on empty highways. Grim.
But his story inspired South Korean director Kim Bo-sol to dream up an animated film,
The Square
(pictured above), which has all the ingredients of a hit, including forbidden love with a North Korean traffic officer, diplomatic intrigue, and heart-wrenching decisions.
Today’s poll
What do you think causes Havana Syndrome?
☢️ Environmental factors
🤕 Psychosomatic factors
🔊 A weapon of some sort
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think this Trump v Powell saga will have wider repercussions?
✅
Yes, central bank independence matters (78%)
❌
No,  it's just another headline  (21%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (1%)
Your two cents:
❌
W.L:
“Frame it any way you want but the competing priorities of each party are what comes out in the end.”
✅
S:
“It's really kind of strange that they'd even go down this path given that he's out in 5 months anyways.”
✍️ R.B:
“Major reform of the FED is needed but like many Trump ideas, he correctly identifies a problem then makes it worse with his solutions.”