URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/a-historic-day-in-davos
Title: 🌍 A historic day in Davos

Today’s briefing:
— A historic day in Davos
— Will Trump’s Board of Peace work?
— Found our dream drive-thru
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. It’s day three of the WEF and folks seem to be running on half tanks. The early adrenaline rush of being in Davos surrounded by the picturesque mountains has worn off. Dotted along the Promenade are over-caffeinated but under-fed attendees (and geopolitical celebs) hopping between events, all eagerly anticipating what President Trump will say in his address this afternoon Davos time.
Trump has touched on many ideas lately, including one we’ll explore in our top story today: the
International Board of Peace
. It’s a proposal to establish a US-led organisation that nominally aims to “
promote stability, restore dependable and lawful governance, and secure enduring peace in areas affected or threatened by conflict.
”
Sounds a whole lot like the United Nations, if you ask me, but maybe that’s the whole point — to fill a perceived gap. It’s a real doozy this one, so let’s dive in.
Davos Dispatch: Day 2
This is how Alpine traffic looks when you jam a ski resort with VVIPs
We’re still on the ground in Davos, so here’s
a quick recap from day 2
:
Everyone’s now looking
less Botoxed, more bloodshot
. It’s partly the late-night parties (particularly the one starring BoJo and Milei). It’s partly how hard it is to get a quick bite to eat — shout-out to whoever invented these cheese vending-machines. But it’s also partly because of all the stress about what’s next.
We’re not just talking about what’s next for European central banker
Christine
Lagarde
, who we saw running around town amid rumours she wants to run WEF. Rather, the Alpine air is thick with stress about
what’s next for our world
.
China’s
He Lifeng (veep) surprised no-one with his usual warnings about “
certain countries
” (the US) dragging us to a world
“where the strong will eat the weak.
”
The bigger surprise came from
Canada’s Mark Carney
, who scored an uncommon standing ovation for his
remarkably sharp address
:
Echoing earlier warnings from Germany’s Merz and others, Carney starkly declared
the end of our world’s rules-based order
Yet he went further, arguing
this order never really existed
, but rather was just a pleasant US-led fiction that no longer makes sense: “
You cannot ‘live within the lie’ of mutual benefit through integration when integration becomes the source of your subordination.
” [btw, Trump himself would nod along to that kind of line if it wasn’t directed at him]
And rather than fall back to a poorer and more fragile “
world of fortresses
”, Carney calls on fellow middle powers “
to stop pretending, to name reality, to build our strength at home, and to act together.
”
The few
critics
we’ve heard on Carney’s ode to Finland’s “
values-based realism
” point out the optics of delivering a values-heavy message after coming in hot from visits to autocracies like China and Qatar. Or quoting Havel after those visits, when Havel also said “
a state that denies its citizens their basic rights becomes a danger to its neighbours as well
”.
Anyway, we’ve long heard these views whispered, or amplified across the emerging world, but Carney might go down in history as
the first Western leader
to lay it all out. The question on everyone’s lips is now how (or if) Trump might respond in his own Davos address later today (Wednesday).
Board Game
Boards are some of our favourite things: surfboards, hoverboards, smorgasbords…
But there’s a new board in town: President Trump’s ‘Board of Peace’ for Gaza.
He proposed it back in October as part of the Israel-Hamas truce, but headlines dried up (we were all a little
distracted
tbh) until last week, when the US shared more details.
So… who’s on board?
(pun 100% intended)
There’s one person whose participation is certain: Donald Trump. As chair, he’s claiming veto powers, agenda control, and even the right to select his successor.
You might’ve expected former British PM
Tony Blair
as another certainty, but word over the break was he’d been dropped, perhaps to mollify Middle Eastern leaders over his Iraq War role. He’s still listed on the Board, though there are rumours his role is now lighter.
The others in Trump’s first
announcement
are all
US nationals
, including Steve Witkoff (special envoy), Jared Kushner (son-in-law / advisor), Marc Rowan (Wall St billionaire), Ajay Banga (World Bank), Robert Gabriel (deputy natsec advisor), and Rubio (~everything).
Why so US-heavy?
Our sense is it was tricky to get broader buy-in, so Trump opted to charge ahead into Phase Two of his Gaza plan while pressuring others to join.
But why so tricky?
Capitals have quietly flagged
a few Board concerns
, including…
a
) the $1B
fee
for permanent membership (slated for Gaza’s reconstruction)
b
) the Trump-dominated
structure
(his is a
lifetime
chair role)
c
) fears Board membership will invite US
pressure
to send troops to Gaza
d
) mission
creep
(Trump says this Board could replace the UN), and…
e
)
who else
is involved.
On that last one (Board membership), Trump has now invited 60+ world leaders to maximise broader buy-in, which maybe makes sense until you recall…
Inviting
Putin
🇷🇺
is a shock for the continent he’s now attacking (
Europe
)
Inviting
Netanyahu
🇮🇱
is a non-starter for
Erdogan
🇹🇷
(and vice versa)
What are the chances
Xi
🇨🇳
joins a board run by
Trump
(zero), and
Some dislike a Gaza board without
Gazans
(who’d be a
Netanyahu
non-starter).
If you squint enough, it all looks like trying to organise an extended Thanksgiving when Uncle Gus still isn’t talking to Cousin Jennifer, who still hasn’t forgiven Grandma Gertrude.
A few
have
now joined
, including Trump-friendly leaders in Argentina, Belarus, Hungary, Morocco, and the UAE, while POTUS has answered
France’s ‘no’
with warnings of 200% wine tariffs until Macron joins! The beatings will continue until membership improves.
Anyway, the full Board reveal is slated for Davos tomorrow (Thursday), and you can bet US diplomats will be twisting arms right up to the buzzer.
Intrigue’s Take
You could pull on any of the above threads and get yourself a nice little podcast series, but let’s ask the obvious one:
will this Board work?
You might argue it’s already working in the unspoken sense of a placeholder to paper over Gaza’s vacuum-packed limbo, which at least extends the uneasy truce.
Yet any
practical
success
depends not just on the Board’s pending membership, but also its expanding mandate. We say “
expanding
” not just because of the president’s “
replace the UN
” remarks, but because his draft Board charter doesn’t seem to mention Gaza! Rather, it now covers “
areas affected or threatened by conflict
” (aka the entire world).
And for all the UN’s flaws, that’ll still irritate UN Security Council members who
rubber-stamped
this Board on the grounds it’d oversee a technocratic Gaza, not set up some parallel structure then start passing the plate around for membership dues that’d eclipse the UN’s entire secretariat budget ($3.5B) with just four swipes of the national Amex.
Sound even smarter:
It’s unclear if Putin’s invite is more US sweet-talking in hopes of Ukraine peace, or another example of Putin getting invited back to the red carpet, free of charge.
Gaza’s reconstruction will cost at least $70B, according to UN estimates.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇵🇪
PERU
-
Part of the problem?
Just months into his interim term, President Jerí is now facing corruption allegations as prosecutors probe his off-calendar meetings with a foreign investor. (
Reuters
)
Comment:
Peru (12% of global copper supply) has been in a rolling political crisis since ~2016, but the malaise goes deeper: the only presidents among the 11 since 1990 to avoid serious legal trouble have been three brief placeholders.
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
Red stamped.
After years of delays and deliberation, London has now approved China’s new mega embassy despite voter pushback and security concerns. (
BBC
)
Comment:
We explored this one
here
, but it was striking how much this became a Rorschach test for the UK’s approach to China — now agree with the outcome or not, at least it’s over. Moving forward, we often mention that every country spies if it can, and uses its embassy to do so if it can. But keep in mind also that capitals spy back on embassies, and it’s much easier to recruit a PRC official abroad than in Beijing.
🇩🇰
DENMARK
-
Sell America?
Amid ongoing fear around US plans for Greenland, Denmark’s pension fund has announced it’s offloading $100M in US bonds by the end of the month. (
CNBC
)
Comment:
The volume is small and (as we foreshadowed) most of Europe’s bondholders are private. But the fund’s unintentionally funny clarification (this isn’t about the US threatening to take our land, but just “poor [US] government finances”) is one heck of a sign of the times. Speaking of pension funds, one of Australia’s giants (ART) just
revealed
it’s not offloading US assets, but rather increasing its currency hedging to reduce exposure to a weakening dollar — ie, the fund likes US assets, but no longer expects the US dollar to act as a counter-cyclical safe-haven).
🇮🇩
INDONESIA
-
Revoked
.
Indonesian authorities have revoked 28 mining permits after connecting the firms to last December’s Sumatra floods, which left over a thousand dead. (
Bloomberg
)
Comment
: This also plays to President Prabowo’s interventionist instincts in the economy, having already brought nickel, coal, and palm assets under state control.
🇻🇪
VENEZUELA
-
Get your bag.
The acting president (and former veep under Maduro), Delcy Rodriguez, has reported receiving the first $300M for Venezuelan oil President Trump said the US would sell on world markets. (
Reuters
)
Comment:
Reuters reporting from last week suggests these dollars will recapitalise local banks with the foreign exchange that crumbling local firms need for inputs.
🇲🇼
MALAWI
-
That’s gonna cost you.
Malawi’s energy regulator has raised fuel prices by over 40% for the second time in four months, as President Mutharika seeks to balance his country’s books en route to more support from the International Monetary Fund. (
BBC
)
Comment:
He might take heart that Nigeria’s Tinubu similarly ditched costly fuel subsidies and managed to ride out the unrest, but Malawi is no Nigeria: its deeper poverty, higher inflation, and weaker fiscal buffers all make this move worth tracking.
Extra Intrigue
The Intrigue jobs board
💼
Programme Officer @
Barbados Red Cross
in (can you guess?) Barbados
Global Financial Crimes Operations Officer @
Morgan Stanley
in Baltimore
Junior Professional @
Geneva Centre for Security Policy
in (guess?) Geneva
Partnerships Manager
@
UNICEF
in Beijing
Après Ski of the day
Credits: Snowboarder.com
In the spirit of being stranded in Davos and desperate for a quick bite that doesn’t require a 30-year mortgage (way above
diplomat pay grade
), we want you to be fully and deeply aware that there is a ski-thru McDonald’s in Sweden.
Pictured above, it’s located at the Lindvallen ski resort tucked in Sweden’s Sälen mountains, over near the border with
Norway
(which, btw, is what an Australian might say if they saw the food prices here at Davos).
Anyway, we are not sponsored by McDonald’s, but still wholeheartedly endorse the idea of shredding it up on Scandinavia’s snowfields then gliding through the Golden Arches to punish a Quarter Pounder With Cheese
®
. McDonald’s, call us
🤙
Today’s poll
Do you think Trump's Board of Peace could replace the UN?
👍 Yes, the UN is practically useless
👎 No, it's the usual bluster
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
What do you think of Europe's response on Greenland?
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
💪
Strong, it'll make Trump back off (24%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
😨
Weak, Trump will double down (70%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write us!) (6%)
Your two cents:
😨
P.P:
“With bullies talk is cheap whilst action is valuable. Show him that we mean what we say by selling a decent amount of US bonds.”
✍️
J.W:
“The European response is not necessarily weak; however, Trump will still double down.”
💪
D.E:
“Trump’s inner circle will find a way to distract him or convince him to claim a win in some other way.”