URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/military-coup-niger
Title: 🌍 A military coup in Niger

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Ever had to ask your office rival for help to fix the coffee machine? So awkward. But that’s kinda how a
North Korean cargo vessel
must’ve felt in 2007 after it got boarded by pirates and put out a distress call, only to be aided by a US destroyer.
Today’s briefing is a 4 min read:
🇳🇪
Niger
is rocked by the Sahel’s latest military coup.
🇸🇬
Singapore
stunned by scandals.
➕
Plus:
The cloud needs water, how the papers are covering a report implicating the Mexican army, and where was the richest person in history?
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇯🇵
Japan
: Microsoft is set to supply Japan with the tech behind its uber-popular AI chatbot Chat GPT. Japan says it’ll use the AI systems
for administrative tasks
, including to draft responses to parliamentary queries.
🇳🇱
Netherlands
: A ship carrying nearly
3,000 vehicles caught fire
on Tuesday night near the Dutch coast. The blaze, which has been burning for two days, is thought to have originated from an electric vehicle.
🇳🇿
New Zealand
: US Secretary of State Antony Blinken has said “
the door's very much open
” for New Zealand
to join the AUKUS
trilateral defence deal. Prime Minister Chris Hipkins says he’s "
open to conversations
", but New Zealand’s nuclear-free policy means it wouldn’t join the nuclear-powered subs component of AUKUS.
🇸🇻
El Salvador
: Congress has approved the use of
mass trials to prosecute up to 900 suspected
gang members at the same time. El Salvador has been under a state of emergency for 16 months, during which over 70,000 people have been arrested.
🇹🇷
Turkey
: Turkey’s biannual International Defence Industry Fair is underway, aimed at
showcasing the country’s growing defence sector.
China is attending with 75 exhibitors, while the UAE and the US are running 15 and six stalls respectively.
🇳🇪
Niger | Geopolitics
Soldiers on TV announcing they’ve deposed Niger’s president, Wednesday night
Niger rocked by Sahel region’s latest coup
Niger’s army has
announced
it’s backing the soldiers who declared on TV Wednesday night they’d deposed President Mohamed Bazoum. The putschists were mostly from the democratically-elected leader’s presidential guard.
The soldiers said they seized power
“following the continued deterioration of the security situation, poor economic and social governance
” in Niger.
But they might’ve had other motives
: the president was slowly making his own security appointments, and was reportedly set to replace the head of his presidential guard. Either way, this coup has potential geopolitical implications:
☢️ France gets a third of its uranium from Niger (which produces 5% of the world’s total supply)
🚀
Niger hosts French and US troops plus two US drone bases, focused on Islamist insurgencies in the region, and
🗽
The deposed president is Western-aligned (sometimes at the cost of domestic popularity).
Meanwhile
, pro-coup protestors are
waving Russian flags
, and Russia’s Wagner Group
says
the coup “
shows the effectiveness of Wagner.
”
But Russia’s foreign minister has
described
it as “
unconstitutional
”, the White House
says
it’s seen no credible evidence of Russian involvement, and one of the lead putschists (head of Niger’s special forces) has
strong US ties
.
Intrigue's take:
This is the seventh coup in western and central Africa since 2020, and it
seems
largely driven by internal factors. But we’ll be watching how France responds (beyond its initial
condemnation
).
Researchers have
identified
rising resentment towards the region’s former colonial power, with neighbouring Mali and Burkina Faso both expelling French troops after recent coups. So in response, France had just promised a
new approach
in Niger. But it may now be too late.
Also worth noting:
Bazoum was elected in 2021 in Niger’s first peaceful, democratic transfer of power since independence from France in 1960.
Still detained, he
tweeted
that “
all democracy-loving Nigeriens
” will ensure “
the country’s hard-won achievements will be safeguarded
.”
Bazoum’s foreign minister
claims
not all factions of the military are on board with the coup.
The
African Union,
the
Economic Union of Western African States
, the
UN
, and
others
have condemned the coup.
📰
How newspapers covered…
A report on the disappearance of 43 Mexican students in 2014
Washington DC, US
“Investigators, denied access in student disappearances, will leave Mexico”
Mexico City, Mexico
“GIEI report shows state involvement in the Ayotzinapa case: Beristain*”
Toronto, Canada
“Mexican army hid key documents in missing students case, expert panel says”
*Carlos Beristain is a member of the panel appointed by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights to investigate the case
Calling all university students and professors!
Ask not what your favourite newsletter can do for you, but what you can do for your favourite newsletter…
We’d love your help to share the Intrigue and connect even more folks on campus with what’s happening in our world. So, if you are:
A university professor, or
A university student
Drop
aine@internationalintrigue.io
a line to find out how you can get involved (without cramping your lecture schedule, we promise
🙂
).
🇸🇬
Singapore | Politics
Political scandals rock squeaky-clean Singapore
Singapore is in damage-control after two scandals involving high-profile lawmakers emerged in recent weeks.
The scandals:
🏨
Transport Minister S Iswaran and hotel magnate Ong Beng Seng are facing
undisclosed corruption charges
, and
🏩
The city-state’s parliamentary speaker has resigned over a
years-long extra-marital affair
with another lawmaker.
The scandals risk eroding trust in the long-ruling People’s Action Party, as
speculation mounts
around the succession plan for Prime Minister Lee (71).
Intrigue’s take:
Singapore has long given off some pretty strong Ned Flanders vibes, with its reputation for clean and competent (if ‘
partly-free
’) government. And the resulting
public trust
partly explains why the ruling party has held power since 1959.
But all those years in charge mean the party faces limited checks on power, so it’s often up to the party to police itself. But as these scandals mount, some Singaporeans might wonder if the party is still up to the task.
Also worth noting:
In an effort to curb corruption, Singapore
pays its leaders
more than any other country (the PM earns $1.7M and ministers make up to $822k a year).
Singapore remains among the least-corrupt countries in the world, according to Transparency International’s
Corruption Index
.
🎧 Today on
Intrigue Outloud
Supporters of President Bazoum in Niger’s capital, Niamey. Credits: AFP
What’s behind the coup in Niger?
Find out here
➕
Extra Intrigue
Look for words horizontally or vertically!
On this day in 1932, the world got its first feature-length zombie movie (‘
White Zombie
’), so here’s a horror film word search!
Alien
Conjuring
Exorcist
Halloween
Insidious
Psycho
Shining
📊
Chart of the day
Credits: Bloomberg.
Turns out our virtual reality requires a lot of real resources. As our computing power needs grow, data centres will need more and more water to operate, which could pose challenges in water-scarce communities.
🗳️ Quiz time!
Test your knowledge on The Sahel region of Africa with this quick quiz.
1) Mansa Mousa (1280 – 1337), arguably the richest person in history, lived in an area situated in which present-day country?
a) Mali
b) Burkina Faso
c) Benin
d) Liberia
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) Through how many countries does the Niger River flow?
a) 5
b) 7
c) 9
d) 10
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) The Sahel takes its name not from the neighbouring Sahara desert, but from an Arabic word meaning…
a) Dry grass
b) Coast
c) End
d) Horizon
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Answers:
1-a, 2-d, 3-b