URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/a-radical-reconciliation-in-dc
Title: 🌍 A radical reconciliation in DC

Today’s briefing:
— A radical reconciliation in DC
— Major elections today
— Worst raffle ever?
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. From listed-terrorist to president (and making the
Time 100 Most Influential
list to boot), Syrian President Ahmed al-Sharaa has had quite the year.
His journey to the top has been anything but straightforward. His CV includes a stint as a US prisoner following the Iraq War, as a rebel leader who then splintered from Al Qaeda, and now as a president who is trying to dial back Iranian influence on Syria.
I saw him speak to a packed out forum in Riyadh for the Future Investment Initiative last month, pitching to the world investment community about how Syria is open for business. He has now taken that message (and more) to the White House - that’s our top story today.
Number of the day
25%
That’s the proportion (per
Bloomberg
) of China-listed firms reporting a loss for H1 this year, the highest share in decades. It’s probably due to what China terms “
involution
” — the destructive, deflationary cycle of price competition sparked by excess capacity.
A turnaround for the movies
Rebranding can be hard. Just ask Swaziland, which got tired of all the Switzerland mix-ups so rebranded as
Eswatini
(can someone pls also have a word with Australia and Austria).
But with a few weeks of 2026 still left, we’re hereby officially declaring the year’s best image makeover goes to… Syria’s president, Ahmed al-Sharaa.
Just think about it
: around this time last year, his
HTS
(
Levant Liberation Group
) suddenly burst out from a decade of civil war to topple long-time dictator and nepo-baby Bashar al-Assad,
literally the same day
a certain celebrity analyst was publishing an article assuring everyone it’d never happen.
So now al-Sharaa has gone from dodging
a $10M US bounty
as the leader of Al Qaeda’s Syria branch, to strolling through the doors of the White House for a handshake with Donald Trump in the first such visit by a Syrian president in history.
But any White House visit is traditionally an enormous injection of international legitimacy, so it’s worth asking…
what does
Trump want in return?
Like that
ending in
Men in Black
, let’s first zoom way out to
the big picture
: the US wants to disentangle itself from the Middle East, fix its finances, and focus its strength on countering what it sees as the #1 challenge today — a more assertive, authoritarian China.
Now down in
the medium picture
is where al-Sharaa’s Syria then comes in. For the US to eventually re-balance its footprint away from the Middle East, it needs a region…
capable
of preventing the return of ISIS
willing
to live side-by-side with US ally Israel, and
determined
to avoid domination by Iran or anyone else.
And
Syria sits right in the middle
of that particular geopolitical Venn Diagram.
First
, Al-Sharaa just used his DC visit to sign Syria up as the 90th member of the US-led
anti-ISIS coalition
, which
should
help normalise ties between al-Sharaa’s forces and Syria’s various US-backed anti-ISIS groups (particularly the Kurds).
Second
, al-Sharaa just
appeared
on Fox News (wild in itself), noting that while Israel’s Golan occupation rules out direct Abraham Accord talks for now, “
maybe President Trump will help us reach this kind of negotiation
” (ie, go push Israel on Golan first).
And
third
, Israel argues its Syria moves are to back Syria’s Druze minority and counter
Iran
. So if the US helps stabilise and unify Syria’s factions against both ISIS and Iran,
maybe
there’s a shot not just at Syria-Israel peace, but eventually a US military drawdown.
But what does al-Sharaa want from this trip?
The World Bank says Syria needs
$216B+
to rebuild after years of civil war. And realistically, that’s not happening unless Syria gets
a
) international legitimacy, and
b
) access to capital.
Yet realistically, that’s what
Trump has now delivered
— you don’t get much more legit than a White House visit, and Syria’s biggest hurdle to capital was always US sanctions, which Trump just suspended for another 180 days.
But why only suspended?
It’s up to Congress to repeal them outright, and several US lawmakers are still wary of al-Sharaa after recent bouts of sectarian violence in Syria. But after meeting the guy in-person (and seeing him
shoot a few hoops
with US military personnel) many on the Hill now seem to be changing their tune.
Intrigue’s Take
Bear with us here, but
diplomacy is sometimes like building an igloo
: you need each block to lean into a shared vision. It’s that mutual reliance that makes the structure stand.
And right now the
US needs several rival blocks to lean in
, whether it’s factions like al-Sharaa’s movement and the Kurds, regional powers like Israel and Turkey, or broader partners like the EU and the Saudis. It only takes one wobble for this project to collapse back into civil war, destabilising more allies while creating more space for Iran and ISIS.
But speaking of ISIS, al-Sharaa’s military triumph over the Assad regime was also
an ideological victory over ISIS
: as he cut ties with Al Qaeda and rebranded as a more local, nationalist, and governance-focused movement, he was undermining not just the devolved jihadist worldview of Al Qaeda, but also the apocalyptic worldview of ISIS.
Ultimately, however, all the blocks in this particular igloo still rest on the same core question: whether this one guy (al-Sharaa) is really now who he says he is.
Sound even smarter:
We wrote
here
about Turkey’s play in Syria after securing the disbanding of key Kurdish foes, the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK).
We also wrote
here
about Russia’s play in Syria, culminating in last month’s meeting in Moscow between al-Sharaa and Putin.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
Semafor
What Washington reads to stay ahead.
How will Nancy Pelosi’s retirement reshape Democratic leadership? Will Treasury Secretary Scott Bessent back Trump’s $2,000 “tariff dividend” — or let it quietly fade?
Find out in
Semafor Washington, DC
— the daily briefing trusted by those who shape policy and power. In a time of deep polarization and global uncertainty, each edition delivers rare clarity, illuminating the conversations within Congress, the West Wing, and the discreet spaces of power where decisions are made.
Get sharp analysis and unbiased reporting delivered to your inbox every weekday morning —
subscribe for free here.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇬🇧
UNITED KINGDOM
-
BB-C you in court
.
President Trump has threatened to sue the BBC for $1B unless the broadcaster apologises and retracts a documentary found to contain selectively edited footage of the president’s January 6th remarks. The BBC chair has now apologised for an “
error of judgement
” and two senior executives have resigned. (
Independent
)
🇮🇳
INDIA
-
Red Fort explosion.
Authorities are still investigating after a presumed car bomb left at least 12 dead near Delhi’s historic Red Fort on Monday. Nobody has claimed responsibility. (
CNN
)
Comment
: The last big terrorist attack against India triggered the biggest India-Pakistan clash in decades, so there’s a lot riding on this investigation. Meanwhile, Pakistan’s defence minister has now said his own country is at war, after a
car bomb
left at least 12 dead outside a court in Islamabad.
🇮🇶
IRAQ
-
To the ballot
.
Millions of Iraqis are headed to the polls today (Tuesday) to elect their new 329-member legislature, with a hung parliament and political gridlock likely. (
Reuters
)
Comment
: Iraq’s competing factions differ more on how to spend — rather than upend — the country’s oil revenues. So Iraq’s bigger oil news this week might be the fact that Russia’s oil major Lukoil is now withdrawing from Iraq’s giant West Qurna-2 oilfield due to US sanctions. It’s a big deal, pointing both to a) the effectiveness of the latest Western sanctions, and b) the likelihood Western players will now fill the void.
🇦🇿
AZERBAIJAN
-
Victory parade.
The leaders of Turkey and Pakistan were in Baku over the weekend for Azerbaijan’s Victory Day parade, with both getting a shout-out for supporting Azerbaijan’s lightning 2023 offensive to seize Nagorno-Karabakh from ethnic Armenians. (
AA
)
Comment
: Interestingly, the Azerbaijanis rescheduled their Victory Day to avoid clashing with a public holiday in Turkey — a hint at where the power lies.
🇹🇭
THAILAND
-
Halt everything.
Thailand says it’s suspending its freshly-signed peace deal with Cambodia after several Thai soldiers were injured by a landmine along their shared border. (
BBC
)
🇪🇨
ECUADOR
-
Prison riot.
Authorities have found over 30 inmates dead after a series of clashes between rival prison gangs. Ecuador’s interior minister has attributed the violence to a plan to move senior gang members to a new, more secure prison. (
Al Jazeera
)
🇮🇷
IRAN
-
No more water.
Iran’s drought is worsening, with key dams for its second-biggest city (Mashhad) now sitting at below 3% capacity, while the capital Tehran urges folks to curb their usage. (
Guardian
)
Extra Intrigue
According to the latest Polymarket numbers…
70%
are betting that conservative opposition figure José Antonio Kast will win this Sunday’s
Chilean
presidential elections.
39%
are betting California Governor Gavin Newsom will be the Democratic nominee for the 2028
US
presidential election.
And
45%
are betting on a US-
Venezuela
military engagement by the end of March 2026.
Raffle of the day
The entrance of Père Lachaise Cemetery in Paris. Credits: Guilhem Vellut.
Ever wished you could RIP amongst the VIPs? Us neither.
But Parisian authorities have opened a raffle in which 30 (ahem) lucky people will win a spot in three of the city’s historic cemeteries, next to the likes of Jim Morrison, Oscar Wilde, Simone de Beauvoir, and Edgar Degas.
Today’s poll
Do you think this 'diplomacy igloo' will hold for Syria?
✅ Yes, failure isn't an option
❌ No, the gaps are too vast
✍️ Other (write us!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Who do you think will blink first?
🇷🇺
Putin's losses are unsustainable (69%)
🇺🇦
Zelensky is outgunned (25%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (6%)
Your two cents:
🇷🇺
J.M.D:
“Putin may not be the one to blink. Someone close to him might, to put it delicately, remove him from the chain of command.”
🇺🇦
M.A:
“The ‘imminent Russian collapse’ and ‘unsustainable losses’ has been talked about since the first year of the war and we are yet to see it. Continued Western support to Ukraine, however, has been far more delicate and fickle than the Russian economy.”
✍️
L.B:
“Zelensky can't back down or he'll lose Ukraine completely and Putin will continue to import bodies from other countries. There will be no blinking.”