URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/a-spooky-month-for-europe-s-leaders
Title: 🌍 A spooky month for Europe’s leaders?

Today’s briefing:
— A spooky time for Europe’s leaders?
— Go work for a development bank in Mexico
— India’s big new AI app
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Here at Intrigue HQ, we get plenty of readers’ feedback about our writing. The lols, the critiques, and everything in between. We always love getting them, and thank you for taking the time to write in.
One piece of feedback we got recently pointed out that our content is fairly “pro West”. It reminded me that even though we consciously strive to be apolitical, we nonetheless carry our biases and particular perspectives on the state of the world.
Anyway, with that, let’s look into
the terrible week that Europe’s leaders have had
.
Number of the day
$4,000
That’s how much an ounce of gold will set you back these days, hitting yet another record with prices surging more than 50% since the start of the year. There are several drivers, including a rush for safe havens amid political and economic uncertainty.
EU-turn
October is the spookiest month up north, as your nights gets darker, your lattes get more pumpkin-spiced, you have to think up a clever-but-not-cringe Halloween costume, and political campaign signs start sprouting on every lawn like judgmental jack-o’-lanterns.
But this October has been particularly spooky for European leaders.
Here’s why, helpfully themed with some classic scary movies so you don’t tune out.
🇫🇷
Nightmare on
L’Elm
Street
Poor ol’ President Macron just
can’t catch a break
, whether it’s his first lady having to prove her gender in a US court, his latest prime minister somehow again becoming
France
’s shortest-lived (three weeks), and now the kicker: his erstwhile allies are starting to turn on him (Macron’s own longest-serving PM just joined calls for him to resign!).
This might be jarring for those used to seeing a confident Macron striding the world stage, but Truffaut himself couldn’t have directed a better scene to illustrate Macron’s
isolation back home
: he was filmed Monday wandering alone by the banks of the Seine.
What’s the problem?
Lawmakers desperately need to pass a budget that puts France’s finances on a sustainable track — its borrowing costs are now higher than Italy’s, which is wild when you recall Italy’s post-war governments have typically only lasted a year!
But his gamble on snap elections to break the deadlock backfired last year, as exasperated voters
abandoned the centre for angry populists
with wildly different cures.
So none of Macron’s options are good: he can
a
) resign,
b
) try his
sixth
PM within two years, or
c
) call another snap election (likely benefiting the populists even further).
All we can say is…
bonne chance
.
🇪🇺
28 Directives Later
EU
leader Ursula von der Leyen is facing
another
no-confidence vote tomorrow (Thursday), her second in three months. She’ll survive, but the growing frequency of this stunt hints at the deepening fragmentation in Europe’s parliament.
Conservatives
argue she’s failing on migration and trade, and
Left-leaning
groups say she’s weak on Gaza and the environment.
But unlike Macron, the EU’s
centrists
still control a majority, and they have her back.
🇮🇹
The Tuscany Chainsaw Massacre
Giorgia Meloni seemed to have cracked the code for stabilising
Italy
’s politics after storming to power as a populist, governing as more of a pragmatist, then holding her coalition together by sheer force of personal popularity.
But her approval has dipped as she now faces tests, both…
At home
: pro-Palestinian general strikes and the aid flotilla (~50 Italians onboard) have dominated headlines, pushing Meloni to dial up her criticism of Israel, while…
Abroad
: her friend and ally (Trump’s America) is threatening to hit 13 Italian companies with crippling tariffs on pasta, citing dumping claims.
Meloni’s marathon honeymoon might be over. Speaking of which…
🇩🇪
Schnell-boy
It’s unclear if Friedrich Merz’s honeymoon ever really got started, and this week gave us another reminder why: his coalition is squabbling again after his centre-right economy minister pushed back on the EU’s EV goals, irking his centre-left environment minister.
Merz will have to burn capital calling his house to order again. Until the next crisis, that is.
Intrigue’s Take
The edges thrive when the centre stumbles. And polls across parts of Europe suggest many are fed-up with the centre, whether it’s on immigration, the economy, or beyond.
But
are the populists ready?
You might get lucky and end up with a Meloni who (love her or not) has at least stabilised things enough for lawmakers to try tackling Italy’s problems.
But France’s outgoing PM said something interesting in his parting remarks: “
I was ready to compromise, but every party wanted every other party to adopt its entire platform
”. It hints at a level of polarisation that risks hurting everyone.
Sound even smarter:
Shout-out to the UK’s Keir Starmer, whose own grim October has included a terrorist attack, more economic malaise, bad polling, and now a security scandal (prosecutors dropped a trial of two British nationals accused of spying for China).
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
NewsBang
The AI Information Platform that Turns Today’s Signals into Actionable Foresight.
You brief others. Who briefs you? NewsBang is an AI information platform built for people who turn headlines into action across foreign affairs, policy, academia, and business. Get high-impact briefings tailored to your portfolio and personalized deep dives that surface credible perspectives. Then test your foresight: make time-bound predictions in our monthly challenge, compare your calls with the crowd and leading AI agents, and see sentiment before it shapes markets or policy. Source-transparent and apolitical, NewsBang is built for speed and clarity. Turn today’s signals into tomorrow’s strategy with NewsBang.
Try NewsBang.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇪🇨
ECUADOR
-
Assassination attempt?
Authorities have arrested five people after an alleged assassination attempt on President Noboa — officials say they found bullet damage after hundreds of protestors surrounded and threw rocks at the president’s vehicle. (
France24
)
Comment:
Noboa has had to declare emergency measures to maintain order in some provinces after he ended costly diesel subsidies last month.
🇪🇺
EUROPEAN UNION
-
Steel yourselves
.
Brussels has unveiled plans to curb the bloc’s tariff-free steel imports in an effort to shield domestic producers, though local automakers argue it’ll just further increase costs for the already embattled sector. (
Reuters
)
Comment:
Germany’s Merz will hold a summit with automakers next week, where he’ll get an earful. What were we saying about European leaders and October again?
🇹🇲
TURKMENISTAN
-
For sale.
Hungary (one of Russia’s last remaining EU customers) is in talks to start importing natural gas from Turkmenistan. (
Times of Central Asia
)
Comment:
Viktor Orbán has long doubled-down on his right to buy as much cheap Russian energy as he wants. This pivot away likely reflects a) Ukraine blowing up Russia’s relevant oil supply pipeline, b) recent pressure from Trump 2.0, and c) the risk of entering a big 2026 election year with energy prices spiking. As for Turkmenistan, it’s a way to diversify away from China, which buys ~90% of its gas.
🇩🇪
GERMANY
-
She’s back.
Former leader Angela Merkel has ruffled feathers from Poland to Palanga this week after seemingly implying the Poles and Baltics share part of the blame for Russia invading Ukraine (by blocking direct, last-minute talks with Putin). (
Politico EU
)
Comment
: Many now blame Merkel’s conciliatory approach to Putin — including entrenching an energy dependency — for emboldening Putin’s imperialist land-grab.
🇲🇾
MALAYSIA
-
Nice try.
Prime Minister Anwar has issued a stern warning to his own tourism minister after officials served alcohol at a government event. He wasn’t buying their
justification that the booze only came out after the event wrapped
. (
The Straits Times
)
🇵🇪
PERU
-
Calling Lima out.
The Andean Community (a bloc including Peru, Colombia, Ecuador and Bolivia) has given Lima a formal slap on the wrist for failing to curb illegal gold mining and mercury trafficking, following local complaints of rivers being poisoned. They want an update from Peru within 20 days. (
AP
)
🇲🇬
MADAGASCAR
-
New PM.
President Rajoelina has appointed an army general as his new prime minister, amid escalating Gen Z–led protests against corruption and beyond.
(
BBC
)
Comment
: He says the general is needed to restore order, but it smells much more like an attempt to secure military backing amid coup fears.
Extra Intrigue
The Intrigue jobs board
💼
Policy Fellow @
European Council on Foreign Relations
in DC
Head of Government Affairs @
Ampol
in Sydney
Deputy Spokesperson @
NATO
in Brussels
Pension Funds Consultant
@
Inter-American Development Bank
in CDMX
App of the day
Courtesy of India’s Ministry of Tribal Affairs
Sure, you could use AI to help match your socks or add mullets to world leaders.
Or you could follow India’s lead and use AI to launch
Adi Vaani
(‘first voice’), an app instantly translating speech and text between Hindi, English, and four of India’s 120 Indigenous languages (Santali, Bhili, Mundari, and Gondi).
Fun fact
: more folks speak Santali than there are people in Denmark or Massachusetts.
Today’s poll
Do you think Macron will announce elections before the end of the year?
🗳️ Yes, he's got no other viable choice
🎩 No, he'll pull another trick
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think President Trump will send Tomahawk missiles to Ukraine?
🚀
Yep, he's lost patience with Putin (44%)
👎 Nope, it's just more words (53%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (3%)
Your two cents:
🚀
S.L:
“A general shift in Trump’s position towards the conflict has been going on for a few months now. If Europe buys them, it would be easy enough to sell to the base. There is little speaking against it right now from Trump’s perspective.”
👎 P.F:
“The cost to set up the infrastructure just to launch a Tomahawk is a prohibiting factor. Nevermind training Ukrainians on how to use it.”
✍️
R.C:
“With Ukraine recently demonstrating their capacity to build their own domestic missiles, Trump may have realised he’s missed out on a potentially lucrative deal — hence the change of mind.”
✍️
A.W:
“Wish we had sent them to Ukraine two years ago.”