URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/a-spicy-russian-intel-leak-fe406bd1923e9659
Title: 🌍 A spicy Russian intel leak

Today’s briefing:
— A spicy Russian intel leak
— Argentina’s shout-out to all the cousins
— How China stops AI cheats
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Remember last month we were exploring who might end up pope, and for some unknowable reason we confidently
asserted
that nobody from the Americas had any chance, and if such a pope
did
emerge, we’d buy you all a drink haha? Ufff.
After the Good Lord himself then decided that
this
was the moment to drop history’s first-ever US pope, we noted in our meek mea culpa the next day that at least it’s a funny way for Intrigue to go bankrupt right? (then we casually and unrelatedly and urgently asked if anyone wanted to sponsor our next happy hour)
Anyway… the very next day, we were delighted to hear from fellow Intriguer, former Czech foreign minister, and now ambassador to the UN, Jakub Kulhánek, who kindly offered to host the next Intrigue event with special guests in New York City!
So… planning to be in Manhattan the
evening of Monday June 23?
Join us
!
Number of the day
700
That’s how many marines the Trump Administration has now deployed to protect federal personnel and property in Los Angeles until 4,000 National Guard troops arrive, as unrest over immigration raids enters its fifth day in the city.
The relationship that was(n’t)
The folks at
The
New York Times
dropped an intriguing little
nugget
over the weekend, reporting they’d received an internal Russian intelligence memo warning that Beijing is
a)
spying on Russia’s war in Ukraine,
b)
spying on Russia’s presence in the Arctic, and
c)
covertly recruiting Russian academics, journalists, researchers, arms-makers, and beyond.
So first… where might this report have come from?
The NYT notes it came from mysterious cybercriminals known as
Ares Leaks
,
but even that leaves us with the question whether Ares in turn got the doc from a hack, a disgruntled Russian, and/or Western spooks (who use both hacks and disgruntled folks).
The NYT says
six Western intelligence agencies validated the memo
, but without us knowing the source, it’s still hard to know this leak’s motive, and therefore its significance.
Think about it like this
:
Cybercriminals
leak for cash
A
disgruntled
insider might leak for a ticket out of Russia
Western
spooks
might leak to sow distrust between two rivals (
🇨🇳
+
🇷🇺
), and
Media
outlets
might
publish
leaks to drive clicks (plus shine a light in the dark ofc)
So each might have a motive to spice up a memo’s authenticity and significance.
For his part, President Trump has already openly flagged his intent to peel Moscow back away from Beijing: “
I’m going to have to un-unite them, and I think I can do that
”.
International relations nerds have gone on to describe this as pulling a ‘
reverse Nixon
’, echoing his ol’ Soviet-era masterstroke of playing one authoritarian off the other, but this time it’d involve:
a)
letting Russia bank its gains in Ukraine via a favourable ceasefire, then
b)
rebuilding US ties with Moscow, all so the US can
c)
pivot hard to counter China.
Anyway, perhaps a more meaningful way to look at all this is to examine this leaked Russian document’s plausibility against what we already know:
Historically
, Beijing-Moscow ties have long featured border clashes and betrayals
Economically
, Russia is now the sanctions-riddled, war-drained junior-burger almost entirely dependent on China’s fuel purchases and industrial capacity, and
Ideologically
, the two neighbours share an interest in wanting to push the world beyond its post-WWII US-led shape.
So against that frenemy backdrop, there’s nothing surprising about Russian spy-catchers fretting about what China might now be up to while Moscow has all its military and intelligence chips stacked 6,500km away in Ukraine.
But at this point, maybe the document’s authenticity is kinda beside the point:
first
, it’s unclear whether this sino-scepticism is just the view of Russia’s professionally paranoid spy-catchers focussed full-time on China, or a fear widely shared across Moscow.
But
second
, even that’s beside the point: wary of his Chinese counterpart or not, Putin
needs
Xi. It’s not that the pros outweigh the cons. Rather, Putin has no choice.
Intrigue’s Take
A spy once told us there’s no such thing as friends in the intelligence world — just shared interests. So this whole story is arguably just another vivid illustration of that.
But we think it’s more:
First
, it’s a story about
optics
. In addition to the optics we’ve explored above, another core component is the optics of Russia’s war against Ukraine. The report notes Beijing’s keen intelligence interest there in learning to counter Ukraine’s Western weapons (given Taiwan also relies on Western arms to defend itself). But there’s a bigger question driving Xi’s thirst for an accurate picture of exactly how Russia is faring:
Will Putin ride into Kyiv victorious? If so, Xi will want credit for helping usher in a new, post-US world order.
Or will Putin be pushed back behind his borders then exiled to some lakeside dacha if not handed to The Hague in return for sanctions relief? If so, Xi will want to pretend he was never involved.
Right now, this war is somewhere in that vast, foggy middle, hence Xi’s intelligence focus on the details so he can calibrate his support/risk appetite accordingly. And you can bet Putin knows this, in yet another reason why he continues to project a sense of success even as his casualty numbers burn past a million: if China backs out, he’s screwed.
Second
and relatedly, it’s about
strategy
. If the release of this report was part of any Western strategy to sow discord between two competitors, it’s not enough. In a world increasingly divided into camps (ahem, multipolar world), this Moscow-Beijing ‘
no limits
’ partnership is less about trust, and more simply about what’s left.
It reminds us of something an official in Africa once quipped to us:
China is like the marathon runner
who doesn’t bother to look back at any competitors, but just focuses on running further ahead
.
Or to put it another way: this race will ultimately be won not by those who fan the most doubt (despots also try this against the West), but by those who offer the most compelling vision for our world ahead — and that’s the lens through which every foreign capital not only views this NYT report, but each day’s developments in the US and beyond.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
Boxabl
Most car factories, like Ford or Tesla, reportedly build one car per minute. Isn't it time we do that for houses?
BOXABL believes they have the potential to disrupt a massive and outdated trillion-dollar building construction market by bringing assembly line automation to the home industry.
They aim to transform home construction, much like how Henry Ford automated car manufacturing – bringing assembly line efficiency and mass production to an artisanal, slow industry.
They delivered an initial prototype order delivered to SpaceX in 2020 and a subsequent project order of 156 homes from the Department of Defense completed in 2021. Now, they are actively delivering to developers and consumers.
You have a chance to invest in BOXABL’s offering at just $0.80/share. All BOXABL crowdfunding will close on June 24th. This includes all accredited and non-accredited offerings.
Invest today before it's too late!
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
US and China prepare for second day of trade talks.
The top economic officials from the US and China are in their second day of trade talks today (Tuesday). While details remain scarce, President Trump has remained upbeat, sharing he’s “
only getting good reports
” from his delegation. (
MSN
)
Comment:
There’s been plenty of musing around who’s really got the cards here, so it was interesting to see a central banker just
appear
at Australia’s Lowy Institute, sharing some concrete data around why China might be feeling relatively confident right now: it seems more US-China trade is in sectors where China has market power.
🇺🇦
UKRAINE
-
Russia launches biggest aerial attack of war.
Moscow’s attack on Kyiv has included ~300 drones and missiles, mostly targeting Kyiv. Unlike Ukraine’s hit on Russian bombers last week, Russia’s attacks continue to show no apparent distinction between military and civilian targets. (
Sky
)
🇬🇧
UNITED KINGDOM
-
NATO chief wants 400% more defence.
NATO boss Mark Rutte has called for a “
quantum leap
” in the alliance’s collective defence after a meeting with UK PM Keir Starmer, including a fivefold lift in air defences as Russia continues its aggression against Ukraine. (
Guardian
)
Comment
: It sounds like Rutte is prepping the ground ahead of this month’s NATO Summit in his native Netherlands, where word is leaders might agree to lift their defence spending targets from 2% to 5% of GDP (Russia is at ~6.5%).
🇰🇷
SOUTH KOREA
-
Court halts new president's trial.
A South Korean court has announced it’ll ditch a trial against freshly minted President Lee Jae-myung on electoral charges from back in 2022. The country’s constitution prohibits the prosecution of sitting leaders for most crimes. (
NHK
)
🇧🇩
BANGLADESH
-
Yunus finally pulls the election trigger.
Caretaker leader Muhammad Yunus has finally announced elections for April 2026, after months of pressure from opposition parties to transition back to democracy following last year’s mass protests that ousted longtime leader Sheikh Hasina. (
DW
)
🇨🇴
COLOMBIA
-
Good news for the Amazon.
Colombia has seen a 33% drop in deforestation for early 2025 (yoy), with Bogota crediting community coordination and a crackdown on illegal deforestation. (
AP
)
🇮🇷
IRAN
-
No dog walking for you!
Tehran has extended its 2019 ban on dog walking to 18 more cities, citing public order and health concerns. (
BBC
)
Comment
: The mullahs have long seen pups as unclean and a mark of Western decay, so dog ownership has become a popular form of dissent for younger folks.
Extra Intrigue
What people around the world are googling
🇰🇭
Cambodian
sports fans googled ‘
Carlos Alcaraz
’ after the Spanish tennis prodigy beat Italy’s Jannik Sinner in
a historic French Open men’s final
.
🇦🇺
Australian
gamers looked up ‘
Xbox handheld
’ after Microsoft finally put a decade of speculation to rest and unveiled its
new handheld console
.
🇦🇷
And
Argentines
searched for ‘
Dia del primo
’ (
cousin’s day
) as folks
across several parts of Latin American celebrated their kin
.
Creative solution of the day
Afraid your students will use AI to cheat during exams?
China’s education authorities have found a fix: just force big tech to freeze all AI tools nationwide while 13 million students sit the country’s famous four-day
gaokao
(university entrance) exams…
Today’s poll
Where do you think the Russian internal intel report came from?
💻 A cybercrime hack
🇷🇺 A disgruntled Russian insider
💼 A Western intelligence agency
✍️ Other (write us!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Who do you think will lose
more
from this Trump-Musk falling out?
🏛️
This is Trump's loss: Musk was his top backer (33%)
🚀
Musk loses more here: those government contracts are critical (66%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (1%)
Your two cents:
🚀
W.H:
“Musk businesses are the clear losers: autonomous driving dereg/electric vehicle subsidies (Tesla); government contracts (SpaceX/Starlink).”
🏛️
G.C:
“The Republican Party is really the big loser. Musk's campaign money is not likely to get spent on incumbents!”
🏛️ C.O.T.E
: “In the short term, there will be some rocky times at Tesla, but the US is deluding itself if it thinks it can do without SpaceX, so Trump's threats are empty ones.”
✍️
B.A:
“America loses - because while the world is focused on the Trump vs. Elon debacle, attention (and resources) are turned away from the things that really matter (like economic bills).”
Disclosure:
This is a paid advertisement for BOXABL’s Regulation A offering. Please read the offering circular
here
.
This is a message from BOXABL
*Reserving a Nasdaq ticker does not guarantee a future listing on Nasdaq or indicate that BOXABL meets any of Nasdaq's listing criteria to do so.