URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/reduced-size-template-7b63910626e90d08
Title: 🌍 A US-China fight over this port

Today’s briefing:
— A US-China fight over this port
— Go work for SpaceX in LatAm
— Tashkent’s new flex
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. In late 2024, President Xi used his state visit to Brazil to announce a “
golden 50 years
” of China-Brazil ties, while Brazil’s Lula vowed the two would “
elevate
” their relationship based on a vision for a “
more just world and sustainable planet.
” And of course, no Chinese visit would be complete without many signed agreements to align host strategies with China’s
Belt and Road Initiative
(though Brazil didn’t formally join).
Fast forward to March 2026, and it looks like China’s been particularly active expanding its footprint in logistics, including via major Brazilian port upgrades for shipping out key agricultural and energy resources. But there’s one particular project, the
vast proposed Santos Port expansion
, that’s recently caught US attention (and ire).
After a quick update on
the latest from Iran
, we’ll dive into why this
possible Chinese port investment in Brazil
is so intriguing and consequential.
PS
— A hearty welcome to new subscribers from my and John’s
conversation
on 2Way last night!
Intrigue Insight: Iran war - Day 20
On the battlefield:
Iran has answered Israel’s hit on
Ali Larijani
(the regime’s most senior loss since Khamenei Sr) by using
cluster warheads against Tel Aviv
, killing two.
Israel’s war with
Hezbollah
is also intensifying, including
airstrikes in Beirut
and fresh evacuation orders south of the Zahrani River.
Meanwhile, the US has
hit more missile launchers along Iran’s Gulf coast
as the regime’s daily drone (70+) and missile attacks (20+) persist at a lower rate.
In the markets:
Iran is now exporting
more oil than before the war
, with US Treasury Secretary Bessent arguing “
we’ve let that happen to supply the rest of the world
”. (
Comment
: full enforcement would
a
) push prices beyond ~$150,
b
) risk escalation with Iran’s main buyer, China; and
c
) exacerbate existing pressure on DC to find an offramp.)
Meanwhile, to say
oil prices
are ‘whipsawing’ doesn’t quite hit — they’re more
acrobatic
, with some barrels now pushing past $150 on the US West Coast and even higher out of Oman (beyond Hormuz) amid Asia’s shortages, while prices ease slightly elsewhere (still $100+) as the Iraqi-Kurdish-Turkey pipeline re-opens.
Comment
: This resumed pipeline is better than nothing, though given it’ll replace barely 1% of the Hormuz deficit, it’s technically quite close to nothing. The market’s reaction probably reflects a *thirst* for good news more than actual good news
.
Beyond
:
The US counterterrorism lead, Joe Kent, has
resigned over the war
,
stating
“
Iran posed no imminent threat to our nation, and it is clear that we started this war due to pressure from Israel
” — claims now rejected by Trump and others.
Safe port?
We’re thinking of a spot: it’s got a 4.2/5 star rating on Google with over 3,300 reviews. One fan by the name of ‘Capt.Tanveer Chougle’ called it his “
favourite place in Brazil
”.
Is it the iconic Iguaçu Falls? The best cachaça bar in Rio? That TGI Fridays in Moema?
Nope. Captain Tanveer is referring to South America’s largest container port:
Santos
. A five-hour drive (let’s be honest: seven) southwest of Rio, this vast port is emerging as the latest flashpoint in our century’s
US-China tug-of-war
. Why?
At a big maritime sector event earlier this month, between a sea bass canape and a sip of bubbly (idk we weren’t there), the local US consul-general cautioned that an upcoming tender to operate a massive new Santos terminal shouldn’t fall into “
unwanted hands
”.
And once those spicy words rippled out into the media, his consulate team spelled it out in writing, flagging “
concerns regarding the participation of
Chinese companies
in the auction, related to sovereignty, security, competition, and strategic leverage
”.
Now. It all raises some big questions, like…
First
…
why all the fuss about Santos?
It’s
not your ordinary port
: with 58 terminals connecting to 600 ports around the world, it already handles three quarters of Brazil’s coffee exports and most of its beef.
And its planned new terminal is…
not your ordinary planned new terminal
: the $1.2B Tecon 10 expansion has been on the drawing board for a decade, aiming to double the port’s container capacity via four new berths across a new 621,000sq m terminal: that’s bigger than Vatican City.
So all that to say, the stakes and steaks are high. Then…
Second
…
what’s China’s interest here?
The big picture
is that
Latin America
has emerged as a reliable supplier of the commodities fuelling China’s growth, while building economic leverage across the Western Hemisphere also really helps when you’re trying to eject the US out of East Asia.
The medium picture
is that
building offshore ports
not only
a
) helps absorb China’s vast excess construction capacity back home, and
b
) generates more earnings (LatAm is China’s third-largest engineering market), but also
c
) gives China control over its critical import/export logistical chains, and even
d
) opens up dual-use possibilities.
On that last
dual-use
point, you don’t have to take our word for it: shortly after taking office, President Xi’s
big 2015 military white paper
spelled out a strategy of military-civil fusion to better harness China’s civilian strengths for its military capabilities. And his follow-up
white paper
in 2019 openly emphasises, say, “
overseas logistical facilities
”.
In practice?
The fear is this kind of commercial infrastructure will help facilitate naval resupply, pre-positioning, and intelligence gathering (eg, per the Djibouti experience).
Either way, a new
report
has crunched the numbers and found China has committed ~$24B to 168 ports across 90+ countries since 2000! So it’s not phoning this in.
Then finally,
the really zoomed-in, pixelated picture
is that
Santos specifically
handles $50B+ in annual trade with China, more than 2.5x the US footprint. And the port’s broader rail, road, and pipeline links make it an attractive hub for the whole continent.
So… there’s nothing surprising about China inevitably making a play for Santos, and it seems Mr Consul-General now wants to get ahead of the game.
Intrigue’s Take
But okay, if there’s nothing surprising about a move on Santos, what options does the US really have in response? For years US friends and partners have urged DC to come to the party with counter-offers so the world at least has options, but what’s even out there?
No US firms can realistically
compete
with China’s low-cost, state-backed port bids, with only European giants MSC and Maersk showing interest
Tariffs mean America’s main advantage (being the world’s largest
economy
) is losing some lustre for the region, and
Big government
initiatives
either die (the TPP) or
could
die and nobody would notice (think IPEF, which came with zero market access or investment dollars).
And yet with President Xi inaugurating Peru’s big Chancay port in 2024, doing nothing is hardly an attractive option either. Beyond the kind of
US hardball
we’ve just seen in China’s undersea cable to Chile (killed via US visa threats), and the hints we’re now seeing on Santos above (spicy statements), there are
other models potentially on DC’s table
:
One
is last year’s quiet deal for the US Army Corps of Engineers to support
Guatemala
’s Quetzal port expansion — it’s less about hustling for tenders, and more about somehow inserting US oversight and standards.
A
second
is last year’s louder but stalled deal for a BlackRock-led consortium to buy-out China’s
Panama
Canal stakes — ie, some kind of arms-length push to leverage America’s vast capital markets for strategic purposes
A
third
is 2022’s purchase of a strategic Subic Bay shipyard in the
Philippines
by the natsec-linked Cerberus Capital — ie, a slightly more naked alignment of private capital with national strategy, and…
A
fourth
is 2023’s
sweetheart deal
via the US Development Finance Corporation to back an
Ecuador
port bid from a friendlier nation like
Turkey
(Cerberus is also now partnering with
Korea
’s HD Hyundai to target port projects).
Anyway, keep an eye on which US strategy emerges ahead, assuming there
is
a strategy beyond spicy statements, which hardly seem a sustainable, longer-term answer to China.
Sound even smarter:
Both Beijing and DC will be tracking Brazil’s presidential elections this October, pitting the left’s more multipolar incumbent (Lula) against a more pro-business and pro-US Flavio Bolsonaro (son of the jailed ex-president).
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇨🇺
CUBA  — Complete darkness.
Millions of Cubans are now back online after another grid collapse plunged them into darkness for almost two days, three months into the US fuel embargo. (
BBC
)
Comment:
The hardship is fomenting rare bouts of public dissent, which is presumably DC’s game-plan to test the regime’s grip on power.
🇺🇦
UKRAINE — First to concede.
Ukraine has reportedly accepted the EU’s help to repair a damaged pipeline delivering Russian oil to Hungary and Slovakia, presumably in return for Hungary dropping its veto on a critical pre-approved $106B EU loan for Ukraine. (
AP
)
Comment
:
This potentially resolves an issue that’s divided Europe for weeks, but Hungary’s Putin-friendly Orbán is fighting for his political life ahead of April 12 elections, so anything’s possible. The EU wants it sorted at the big leader summit in Brussels starting tomorrow (Thursday), though Orbán is insisting he won’t drop his veto until the oil actually starts flowing, which wouldn’t be until after election day anyway.
🇮🇳
INDIA — Rebel, rebel.
India has detained six Ukrainians and one American on suspicion of entering Myanmar to train pro-democracy rebel groups and smuggle drones. (
SCMP
)
Comment:
India’s concern isn’t so much the fate of Myanmar’s ruling military junta, but rather that some of the opposing armed groups share ethnic ties with communities on India’s side of the border — ie, Delhi fears spillover.
🇵🇹
PORTUGAL — Skip the queue.
Portugal has become the first to launch the EU’s new
“Travel to Europe”
app, allowing non-EU travellers to pre-register entry data up to 72 hours in advance. It aims to help ease the big delays that followed the EU’s new biometric border program late last year. (
Euronews
)
🇹🇭
THAILAND
— Higher fences.
Following last year’s deadly border clashes with Cambodia, Thailand will begin building fenced and surveilled sections along its frontier next month. (
Bangkok Post
)
Comment:
These new fences apparently don’t involve disputed territory. The more interesting bit for us is that the construction is part-funded by more than $6M in public donations! Seems a pretty clear indicator of nationalist sentiment right now.
🇨🇴
COLOMBIA — Early stage investor.
Colombia is seeking a US sanctions waiver to allow its state firms to invest in Venezuelan energy projects, including reviving a cross-border pipeline. (
AP
)
Comment:
It’ll be interesting whether DC greenlights this deal to help stabilise Venezuela and ease Colombia’s energy shortage, or whether DC uses this leverage for broader concessions on (say) regional security. Either way, one neighbour having to seek US permission to invest in another is a stark reminder of DC’s gatekeeper status
.
🇸🇳
SENEGAL — Suddenly second.
Three months after Senegal won a chaotic
Africa Cup of Nations
soccer final against the tournament’s Morocco hosts, the league’s appeals board has now flipped that result to a 3-0 win for Morocco! The decision argues Senegal technically forfeited the match (and so now suffers a default 3-0 loss) when its team briefly walked off the field in protest. Senegal is appealing. (
Reuters
)
Comment:
Sure it’s just sport, but it’ll play into the continent’s wider fault lines between Africa’s oil-rich, Arabic-speaking north and the rest.
Extra Intrigue
The Intrigue jobs board
💼
Entrepreneur in Residence
@
OCCRP
in Amsterdam, Sarajevo, or remote
Global Operations Manager, Latin America
@
SpaceX
in Texas
Research Manager, Int’l Trade & Finance
@
Library of Congress
in DC
Partnerships and South-South Cooperation Specialist
@
UN
in Shanghai
Site of the day
Pic courtesy of the centre itself.
Next time you’re passing through Uzbekistan like the big party animal you are, you might notice this vast new structure above, towering over Tashkent’s old city.
Personally overseen by President Mirziyoyev for almost a decade, the ~$150M
Islamic Civilization Center
had its grand inauguration yesterday (Tuesday).
Roughly seven times bigger than the White House, Mirziyoyev announced the project shortly after his strongman predecessor (Karimov) died in 2016. Beyond the faith specifics inside (rare manuscripts, repatriated relics, historical artefacts), the centre also serves political and geopolitical purposes, including to…
a
)
signal
post-Karimov continuity and stability
b
)
anchor
his rule and legitimacy in tradition, and
c
)
position
his country as a custodian of shared legacy across the region.
Today’s poll
Who do you think is 'winning' the battle for LatAm influence?
🇨🇳 China (tell us why!)
🇺🇸 The US (tell us why!)
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Which Hormuz strategy do you think the US will prioritise next?
✈️ Maintain the status quo in hopes the regime collapses (23%)
💥
Escalate in hopes the regime collapses (57%)
🤝
De-escalate via a negotiated offramp (18%)
✍️ Other (write in!)  (2%)
Your two cents:
🤝
R.N:
“Since Trump is not getting the support he
thought
he would get from allies, and midterms are approaching, he needs to have an exit strategy.”
✍️
R.O:
“
Will
and
should
are two different things. They should look for an offramp.”
Disclaimer
:
Learn about Max Refund Guarantee details and eligibility. **Learn about Accurate Calculations Guarantee details and eligibility. Exclusions apply. *5-day refund estimate is based on filing data from tax year 2024. Refund windows are subject to change for 2025. We do not guarantee when you will receive your refund. Timing estimates are dependent on the timing of your submission of a complete return and when the IRS submits your refund. Cash App is a financial services platform, not a bank. Banking services provided by Cash App's bank partner(s). Tax Filing Preparation services are provided by Cash App Taxes, Inc. All Rights Reserved.