URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/a-week-of-espionage
Title: 🌍 A week of espionage

Today’s briefing:
— A week of espionage
— New dictator just dropped
— Meme of the day
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. You know that Norman Rockwell painting meme where a regular guy stands up at a town meeting to voice his presumably unpopular opinion? This morning, I’m him: “
the Winter Olympics are better than the Summer Olympics
”. Cue outraged murmuring among the townsfolk.
I like to imagine a casual conversation at the annual Olympian Christmas party: Oh you do the long jump? Me too! Except 100m through the air on very long, wobbly planks. You’re a crack shot at 50m? Oh what a coincidence, me too! Right in the middle of running a marathon on very skinny, wobbly planks.
And then there’s the skeleton, which... look, I don’t want to be grim, but if you’ve recently gotten some bad news from the doctor and are looking to go out on your own spectacular terms...
To top it all off, every single TV shot is framed by the spectacular Italian Alps. Motion unanimously passed, I think you’ll agree.
Now, with that out of the way, let’s get on to the fun stuff: a classic Friday Intrigue story involving communist
spies
, stolen NATO
secrets
, and a
CIA
tip-off.
Name of the day
Tarique Rahman
That’s the likely next prime minister of Bangladesh (pop. 175m), after his centre-right party won a majority in yesterday’s elections. He’s no stranger to power: his mother was the country’s first female prime minister, and his father was assassinated while serving as president in 1981.
The spies among us.
There’ve always been spies among us. That college friend who says they work at State but never posted their Flag Day snaps to LinkedIn? Suspicious. Or the neighbour who’s
really
curious
about what you do in that embassy all day? Interesting.
Whether it’s King Zimri-Lin’s vast Mesopotamia spying network 3,800 years ago, or ✌️consultants✌️ pinging us on LinkedIn with too-good-to-be-true jobs today, espionage always makes for blockbuster material, and it’s been a busy week, starting with…
How they recruit
The classic framework for why folks turn is ‘
MICE
’: money, ideology, coercion, and/or ego.
For a
money
example, look no further than Germany, where it turns out the Kremlin only had to pay a few useful idiots €100 per vehicle to blow up 270+ exhaust pipes and make it look like the work of a hawkish party Moscow didn’t like, all while polarising Germany.
For
ideology
(with a bit of money and ego), look at what
the CIA
just did this week, dropping its latest Mandarin-language
YouTube video
titled
“Save the Future”.
Aimed at
disillusioned officers in the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) amid President Xi’s
sweeping purges
, it frames cooperation with the CIA not as a betrayal, but a way to "
take control of your own destiny
" and protect your family from a corrupt system.
The curious thing about this campaign is how it’s almost
the inverse
of the CIA’s earlier big PLA drive when it plied ambitious officers with cash to help bribe their way up — rather than hunker down from — a corrupt system.
Will it work this time?
CIA boss John Ratcliffe argued similar ads worked last year, but he’s going to declare success either way: the mere existence of an ad and victory lap is already enough to pour gasoline on Xi’s flaming paranoia, helping rattle China’s elites.
But while you can see how Xi’s aggressive purges might leave insiders more open to a CIA off-ramp, you can also see how the CIA’s last China ending (CIA sources getting rounded up and shot) would leave any insider locked shut. And yet… if you’re worried your own paranoid boss might purge you anyway, maybe you take another look at that off-ramp?
What they want
Estonia
just dropped its
annual intelligence report
, offering a perfect example of how spooks prioritise: it dedicates
five of its seven
chapters to Russia! And that makes sense when you recall Russia has attacked Estonia multiple times.
It also explains why Estonia’s intel has long had
cult followings
across the West: eg, Estonia’s legendary Russia analyst (and current ambassador to Israel) Andres Vosman just went viral with insights on the Kremlin, whether obsessively monitoring its own people, dreading the fallout from returning veterans, or deepening its own dependence on China.
The Estonian report also highlights that, yes,
friends spy on friends!
It gives the example of
North Korean
operatives actively gathering info across Russia and China, the regime’s closest (only?) partners. Why? The target cities (China’s Dalian and Shenyang, Russia’s Blagoveshchensk) are just over the border, suggesting a focus on:
a
) managing and exploiting DPRK’s own worker diaspora, and
b
) stealing nearby defence tech (the DPRK has science & tech ✌️attachés✌️ there).
Btw, speaking of stealing defence tech, Google just released
a grim report
on how state-backed hackers are now targeting employees right across Western defence supply chains.
When they get caught
As of this week, a 54-year-old squadron leader in the Greek air force is now in detention for allegedly
leaking NATO secrets to China
. Seems his handlers first pinged him on LinkedIn with a consulting opportunity, then met him in-person near a NATO summit.
The military bigwig then made an undeclared trip to China in 2024, where Beijing’s MSS seems to have sprung the trap — maybe of
the honey variety
, though it could just as easily be the mere threat of publishing pics of him secretly meeting MSS operatives.
Either way, he allegedly caved, did some training on how to send classified docs via an
encrypted device
, and started earning €5,000–15,000 per leak via a debit card linked to a Hong Kong-based payments provider. Greek intelligence seemingly got a CIA tip-off, and has made a surprising amount of detail public here, as has Paris this week in charging…
four guys for using a satellite dish at an
Airbnb
to intercept secrets for China, and
another for wearing
video-recording glasses
on a fighter jet assembly line in Cergy!
There’s sometimes leverage in managing these cases quietly, but all the publicity here suggests Western capitals are signalling for
a
) locals not to be stupid, and
b
) rivals to know there’ll be increasingly steep costs ahead.
Intrigue’s Take
We’ve barely scratched the surface of a single week here, dear Intriguer. We could’ve added Australian intelligence recruiting a foreign imam to infiltrate extremists in Sydney, or the Turks arresting two alleged spies for Israel, or the American who just got three years for trying to leak info to China from a base in Germany, or even the Canberra bakery assistant facing charges she was helping China’s communist party track a local diaspora.
But the point is it’s everywhere. And former French intel operative ‘Jack Beaumont’ once described to us what it’s like to have your eyes opened to that fact: it’s like how after going scuba diving for the first time,
you can never un-see
what’s beneath the waves.
Anyway, it’s only going to get more pervasive as our world gets more spooked. And while we all tell ourselves we’d never betray our country, anyone working in a sensitive area should remember there are entire teams out there with legit tech, tradecraft, and tenacity, whose literal only job is to test that assumption in every possible way.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by…
Stop typing prompt essays
Dictate full-context prompts and paste clean, structured input into ChatGPT or Claude. Wispr Flow preserves your nuance so AI gives better answers the first time. Try Wispr Flow for AI.
See a demo
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇯🇵
JAPAN — Stop right there.
Japan’s fisheries agency has seized a China-based fishing vessel after it refused inspection and attempted to flee, with the 11 onboard now facing potential charges back in Nagasaki port. (
NBC
)
Comment:
This one’s significant not so much for the location (absolutely within Japan’s EEZ), but the timing, coming just days after hawkish Sanae Takaichi won her historic (re)election: Beijing may well see it as Takaichi’s first move.
🇰🇵
NORTH KOREA — Nepo baby.
South Korean intelligence has told lawmakers the 13-year-old daughter of the North’s dictator (Kim) has now advanced to “
successor-designate
” stage from her earlier “
successor training
” status. (
The Chosun Daily
)
Comment:
We’ll soon get a sense how accurate this assessment is, because the North’s five-yearly Workers’ Party congress is scheduled for later this month — the young girl’s attendance, seating, and/or official mentions will all offer clues. Btw, the world first learned of her existence (and possible name) thanks to *that* visit by NBA star Dennis Rodman in 2013, when he reported holding her as a baby.
🇩🇪
GERMANY — Crucial conference.
The influential Munich Security Conference kicks off today (Friday), attracting ~record world leader attendance amid cascading crises. (
Politico
)
Comment:
There’s speculation Marco Rubio might seek to stabilise transatlantic ties in his address tomorrow (Saturday) after last year’s JD Vance speech. But any hoped reassurance might now be undercut by the fact DC’s budget showdown means the biggest-ever congressional delegation to Munich is now cancelled (though some members will still attend on their own).
🇺🇦
UKRAINE — Olympic level drama.
President Zelensky has blasted the Olympic Committee as “
playing into the hands of aggressors
” after it banned a Ukrainian athlete over a helmet depicting some of the ~600 athletes and coaches killed by Putin’s attacks. (
France24
)
Comment
:
When the stakes are existential (as for Ukraine), the apolitical quickly looks political. We
explored
the geopolitics of the Winter Games last week.
🇰🇪
KENYA
— Let’s try this again.
President Ruto has announced Kenya will reopen its border with Somalia in April, almost 15 years after al-Shabab terrorist attacks forced its closure. (
BBC
)
Comment
:
It’s a good sign, though less so when you consider this announcement has been delayed multiple times over the years due to insecurity, and Ruto is now having to accompany the move with a big troop deployment. We
explored
some of the security challenges facing the Horn of Africa on Wednesday.
🇲🇽
MEXICO — To the rescue.
Two Mexican naval ships have docked in Cuba with ~536 tonnes of food and other humanitarian aid, a couple of weeks after President Trump threatened tariffs on anyone supplying the Cubans with oil. (
AP
)
Comment
:
We
explored
the Cuba situation earlier this week. Since then, Air Canada has suspended flights due to the local fuel shortage, further straining Cuba’s critical tourism sector. It’s unclear where this lands, but there’s a growing sense something will break.
🇸🇦
SAUDI ARABIA — New kid in town.
The kingdom has appointed a new investment minister (Saif), quietly putting the old guy out to pasture as the crown prince’s big Vision 2030 hits turbulence. The new minister was previously an exec at Riyadh’s $925B
Public Investment Fund.
(
Al-Monitor
)
Comment
:
It’s a tricky bind for the Saudis, who are already running a deficit (impressive for the world’s ~largest oil exporter), but realistically need to keep spending if they want to diversify away from oil and hit their ambitious $100B annual FDI target by 2030.
Meme of the day
No offence to the many good ones, but oh lordie, find yourself serving under a bad political ambassador and you’ll soon be arriving at meetings like rapper 21 Savage arrived at the Super Bowl: absolutely hugging that wall to maximise your distance from the fallout as your happy but hapless envoy mangles greetings, offends locals, then aggressively brings up the one thing your notes begged the ambassador not to raise.
Friday Quiz
Test your knowledge of this week’s happenings.
Which country launched a state-backed LLM this week?
Chile
China
Colombia
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Where is a semi-honeypot scandal now taking place?
Argentina
Sweden
Hungary
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
What age of politics did a top Munich report say we're in?
Lackluster politics
Wrecking ball politics
Freezing cold politics
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
✍️ Corrections corner
Thanks to those Intriguers who pointed out yesterday’s Colombia/Venezuela map pins were swapped! 🤦‍♂️