URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/albanese-meets-xi
Title: 🌍 Albanese meets Xi

Today’s newsletter supported by:
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Spare a thought for folks in China’s Hunan province who have to climb a
120m vertical cliff
to get to their local convenience store.
📢
PSA
: Our quick team retreat means there’ll be no briefing this coming Friday, Monday or Tuesday, but we’ll be back in your inboxes from Wednesday the 15th!
Today’s briefing is a 5 min read:
🇦🇺
End of a long winter for
China
and
Australia
?
🇰🇷
South Korea
bans short selling (again).
➕
Plus:
An unpopular system, how the papers are covering recent Israel/Palestine protests, and why people in India are tweeting about pollution.
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇨🇳
China
: Vice-Premier He Lifeng will travel to San Francisco this week to
meet US Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen
ahead of a much anticipated Xi-Biden meeting. He Lifeng, who’s close to President Xi, is now China’s top economic and finance official.
🇵🇱
Poland
: Citing
parliamentary practice
, Poland's president has given current Prime Minister Morawiecki the first attempt at forming a new government. The PM’s nationalist party won the most seats at last month’s elections, but not enough to form government alone.
🇨🇰
Cook Islands
: The leaders of PNG, Vanuatu and Solomon Islands (plus New Zealand’s newly elected leader) are
skipping this week's Pacific Islands
summit for various reasons. Its theme is ‘
Our Voices, Our Choices, Our Pacific Way: Promote, Partner, Prosper
’.
🇺🇸
US
: Secretary of State Blinken has made an
unannounced visit to Iraq
where he met Prime Minister Al-Sudani. The pair discussed the dangers of a widening Israel-Hamas war, and ongoing attacks by Iran-backed militias against US troops stationed in Iraq.
🇬🇳
Guinea
: Former Guinean dictator Moussa Dadis Camara was
recaptured after an apparent jailbreak
over the weekend. Camara’s lawyer insists the former army chief was kidnapped.
🇦🇺
Australia | Geopolitics
Australia is out of China’s diplomatic deep-freeze
Australia-China ties are finally defrosting
Prime Minister Anthony Albanese
met
Chinese President Xi Jinping in Beijing last night (Monday). It was the first visit to China by an Australian leader in seven years.
Australia-China ties have been on a rollercoaster
this past decade. Australia secured a coveted free trade agreement with China in 2015 after President Xi became China’s first leader to address Australia’s parliament.
But things then
started to go sour
as Australia became wary of a more assertive China, while China increasingly bristled at Australia’s responses.
When Canberra then called for an investigation into the origins of COVID-19 in 2020, Beijing cut off high-level contact and imposed a range of tariffs.
So why are things thawing now?
On the Australian side, a new government took office last year and set out to ‘stabilise’ ties via a change in tone more than substance,
cheered on
by businesses feeling the brunt of China’s trade restrictions.
And an increasingly isolated China saw this as a chance to
dial things back
, refocus on its domestic challenges, notch up a good news story with the West, and minimise secondary, oxygen-sucking quarrels.
So back to the present - what did last night’s meeting achieve?
The two leaders
joked
about whether pandas or Tasmanian devils are cuter, but didn’t make any major announcements.
After a rollercoaster decade, the meeting itself was the message.
Intrigue's take:
This defrosting has been constructive for both leaders looking to demonstrate they can manage a tricky relationship without looking weak. That could also help other world leaders still thinking through how best to manage a bigger, bolder China.
But of course, the real test for the Australia-China relationship will come when the two countries next disagree.
So, seen from another perspective, this defrosting was a low-cost way for China to rebuild economic leverage over Australia in case it one day needs to influence Canberra’s positions on
core
Chinese interests (like Taiwan).
Also worth noting:
Here’s how Australian
Foreign Minister Penny Wong
summarised
her country’s current China approach:
“When I say we seek to stabilise the relationship, I use that phrase quite deliberately. I don’t use the word normalise, I don’t use the word reset because the reality is neither country is going back to where we were 15 years ago.”
🎧 Intrigue Outloud
Need to catch Intrigue on the go? Check out today’s Intrigue Outloud podcast to hear
why Anthony Albanese’s visit to China was an historic one.
🎧 Click here to find out!
📰
How newspapers covered…
Israel/Palestine protests around the world
Warsaw, Poland
“Turkey: Pro-Palestinian crowd storms U.S. air base, police use tear gas, water cannons”
Bangkok, Thailand
“Thousands march in Europe and Iran protests for Palestinians”
Mumbai, India
“US: Thousands of protesters call for ceasefire in Gaza amid Israel’s assault against Hamas”
Today’s newsletter is supported by: Millennium Space Systems, A Boeing Company
Small Satellites, Big Missions
Millennium Space Systems, a Boeing Company, is a small satellite prime, delivering high-performance constellation solutions for National Security Space.
Founded in 2001, the company's active production lines and 80% vertical integration enable the rapid delivery of small satellites across missions and orbits – LEO, MEO and GEO.
Check it out.
🇰🇷
South Korea | Geo-economics
South Korea clamps down on short selling
South Korean regulators
imposed
on Sunday (5 November) a temporary ban on short selling until June.
Short selling is a common practice in which an investor bets against the value of a given asset. In most cases, an investor:
🏛️ Borrows shares from a stock broker
💵
Immediately resells them
📉
Waits until the share price drops, and then
🤑
Buys the shares back, returns them to the broker, and pockets the difference (or swallows the loss).
But bigger investors were using an illegal practice in Korea called ‘naked short selling’ to short sell shares without first borrowing them.
And legal or otherwise, regulators say this was all contributing to market volatility and harming everyday (‘retail’) investors.
Intrigue’s take:
Score one for the little guys. South Korea’s benchmark share index rose yesterday (Monday) more than 5% on news of the ban.
But by (again) intervening like this, South Korea risks undercutting its own efforts to
boost its appeal
as a lucrative, developed market.
Also worth noting:
South Korea previously imposed a partial, 14-month short selling ban during the
early days of the pandemic
.
➕
Extra Intrigue
Here’s what folks around the world have been tweeting lately
🇿🇦
#Gaza
was trending in
South Africa
after Pretoria
recalled its diplomats
from Israel in protest.
🇰🇪
Kenyans
were tweeting about “
Hellen Obiri
,” the legendary Kenyan distance runner who won the
New York City Marathon
on Sunday.
🇮🇳
And folks in
India
were debating
#DelhiAirQuality
after the capital announced a partial and temporary
ban on private vehicle
use.
🗳️ Poll time!
What question / issue should we cover in this week's 'Road to COP28' feature?
We'll cover the winner in Thursday's edition!
1️⃣ How is this year's COP different to the last 27?
2️⃣ Do big climate conferences work? And if not, what are the alternatives?
3️⃣ Who holds most sway in COP negotiations?
4️⃣ What's all the drama surrounding the new 'loss and damage' fund?
✍️ Other (send in your COP questions, we might add them next week!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
🗺️
Map of the day
Level of Metric Adoption
Credits: World Population Review
It’s often said the US, Liberia, and Myanmar are the only three countries still formally using the imperial system (i.e., inches, feet, pounds, gallons, etc). But as the
above map
suggests, things are sometimes a tad more nuanced.
Yesterday’s poll:
How worried are you about AI taking your job?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
😋
Not at all scared  (41%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️
🙄
A little concerned (26%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
😣
Pretty concerned (13%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
😱
Very scared (3%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🥰
I'm looking forward to it, actually (14%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!) (3%)
Your two cents
:
😋
M.J.H:
“I work implementing innovation and automation technology. It will be a while before it can actually build itself.”
🙄
C.M:
“I’m not afraid of AI being
better
than a human. I’m afraid it will be half as good as a human at 80% less expensive and the budget conscious managers will say “Hey, mediocrity sounds good to me."
✍️
C:
“I'm retired. If AI can figure out what I do, it's welcome to it.”
🥰
S.S:
“Too much of my job is mind numbingly repetitive. Better AI would allow me to do more creative things.”