URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/an-intriguing-dubai-air-show
Title: 🌍 An intriguing Dubai Air Show

Today’s briefing:
— An intriguing Dubai Air Show
— Crypto crash casualty
— World’s tallest leader?
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. I must confess I’ve always been deeply fascinated by fighter jets. And before you jump to conclusions — this fascination had nothing to do with watching
Top Gun
or its superior sequel.
🤥
I remember one of the first times I watched a pack of fighter jets fly by IRL. It was in Turkey for a WWI commemoration, and I was enthralled by their speed and agility. I felt those same feelings watching the Blue Angels perform during Fleet Week in San Francisco just a few years ago.
Lately I've become more interested in
the geopolitics and economics of fighter jets
. For example, in the US, all 50 American states contribute to the fighter jet industry. It’s even more intriguing to see how this plays out on the global stage. Let’s dive into that in our top story today.
Year of the day
1999
That’s the last time we saw Japan’s 20-year bond yields this high (~2.78%), as investors fret whether Prime Minister Takaichi’s massive rumoured spending package is sustainable.
Jet-measuring contest
There’s still time to get your gift requests to Santa’s workshop. And if this week’s Dubai Air Show is any indication, lots of governments now have the same thing high up on their wish list: not Labubus, nor K-pop merch, but
🔥
jets
🔥
.
Here’s what’s happening:
The hardware
The Dubai Air Show is one of the few venues where rivals can still flaunt their fighters side-by-side. We’re talking American F-35s next to Russian Su-57Es and Chinese J-35s.
As always,
Lockheed
reps point to the F-35’s proven combat record, but that’s a
little
less special this year: China’s rival
AVIC
has been flying high since Pakistan used the J-10C to down India’s French-made Rafales earlier this year.
And whatever Russia’s new Su-57E lacks in a track record, stealth tech, or even a plausible production line, its
UAC
manufacturer is promising to make up via lower costs (half an F-35) plus more tech transfer and domestic assembly for buyers.
Speaking of….
The host
Hosting all these rivals side-by-side is
on brand for the Emiratis
, who’ve spotted a gap in our splintering world for a neutral hub or showroom, whether hosting massive AI investments, US air force squadrons, a French naval base, or even Putin himself in 2023.
But the Emiratis aren’t just playing host. They just signed a massive $38B deal for 65 Boeing airliners, and unveiled
their China-built L-15s
. These are just training jets, but they carry a message: the UAE ordered them shortly after the US declined to sell F-35s.
The message? We have options. Maybe unlike…
The absentees
News is breaking that Germany and France are rethinking the
Future Combat Air System
(FCAS), their €100B sixth-gen aircraft project with Spain. Why? Two key players Airbus and Dassault have been squabbling over who designs, supplies, and controls it.
So there’s talk of just scaling FCAS back to its ‘
combat cloud
’ pillar rather than, you know, an actual jet. But that’s tricky because this new FCAS jet — Europe again joining forces to compete — was meant to help replace Eurofighters and Rafales from the 2040s.
But instead, there’s
potentially
(see below)
a gap emerging
in Europe’s defence offering, right as it’s hustling to fill US gaps (though an Italy-UK-Japan jet collab is also in the works). Speaking of the US…
The showstopper
The biggest jet story this week might actually happen in DC, where the Saudi crown prince is due today (Tuesday) for his first White House visit since ordering the assassination of Washington Post columnist Jamal Khashoggi back in 2018.
And word is
the US might finally now sell the F-35 to the Saudis
. It’s unclear where all the horse-trading will land, but…
The Saudis
want F-35s, US civilian nuclear tech, and firmer US defence pledges
The US
wants the Saudis to finally recognise Israel via the Abraham Accords, and
Israel
wants that too but is wary of losing its edge as the only regional power flying the F-35, in a favourable regional balance pledged via
a 2008 US law
.
So yes, these air shows are partly just about doing sweet tricks up in the sky while military jocks crane their necks (such as they are) to see. But they’re also much, much more.
Intrigue’s Take
We popped a sneaky ‘
see below
’ above, but now that you’re ‘below’, it’s time to ‘see’: the other big jet story that caught our eye featured Ukraine’s President Zelensky wrapping a European tour where he’s flagged plans to buy up to 250 fighter jets from the US (F-16s), France (Rafales) and Sweden (Gripens). It raises all kinds of questions, like…
How?
There are already backlogs, and running different jet systems is costly
When?
Beyond symbolic deliveries, this is realistically a decade-long venture, and
With what cash?
The Belgium-based body holding Russia’s frozen assets is now
warning
it could sue the EU over plans to use them for Ukraine’s self-defence.
So what’s really going on here? For us, it’s an example of how flying death machines aren’t just about dropping bombs on targets, but also lobbing messages at hurdles:
Sweden and France
dig the public endorsement of their arms exports
Ukraine
digs the signal that the West is invested long-term
The US
digs the signal that Europe is shouldering more of the burden
The EU
digs the pressure this puts on hold-outs around using Russia’s assets, and
All the above
dig a chance to satisfy domestic audiences wanting more support for Ukraine’s self-defence.
Meanwhile, the whole focus on jets this week also sends a broader message about the future of manned platforms themselves: while drones are reshaping war, it seems capitals are still betting they’ll augment — not replace — jets for the foreseeable future.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇺🇳
UNITED NATIONS
-
Gaza plan approved.
The UN Security Council has approved the US-led resolution to establish an international stabilisation force (ISF) in Gaza for at least two years, granting a broad mandate for Gaza’s demilitarisation and reconstruction. There were 13 votes in favour, two abstentions (China and Russia), and none opposed. (
BBC
)
Comment:
It’s not just a big win for a gridlocked UN, but also a big win for the US, which has managed to clear Israeli, Palestinian, Beijing, and Moscow hurdles, all while getting key Arab and Muslim players onboard. The US now wants the ISF deployed (with troops from Indonesia, Azerbaijan, and others TBC) as soon as January, though Hamas has again rejected disarmament — but this UN resolution means confronting the latest Hamas challenge might now fall to the ISF rather than Israel’s IDF.
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
Epstein files released?
Congress is today (Tuesday) set to approve a bill calling for authorities to release all Epstein files, after President Trump abruptly reversed course on months of trying to block such a vote. He now says he has nothing to hide. (
Reuters
)
Comment:
After the House, the bill goes to the Senate then the White House, before the justice department redacts victim details pre release. Meanwhile, former treasury secretary and Harvard boss Larry Summers is now “stepping back from public commitments” after Epstein files revealed not only his own ties with the disgraced predator, but also his attempts to pursue an affair with a mentee whose father was China’s vice-minister of finance (and now heads China’s Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank). Add this to the geopolitics of Epstein, which we explored
here
.
🇧🇩
BANGLADESH
-
Former PM sentenced to death.
A top court has sentenced former leader Sheikh Hasina to hang for her role in a deadly crackdown on the protests that ousted her last year. (
Guardian
)
Comment
: This now becomes more of a headache for India, where she’s been in exile since fleeing in a helicopter last year. It might also play into February’s elections, given Sheikh still has local supporters yet her party is banned from participating.
🇱🇹
LITHUANIA
-
Crypto crash.
Analytics platform DappRadar, popular among those navigating the crypto space, has announced it’s shutting down after seven years, citing “
current conditions
”. It comes amid a broader slump that’s wiped a trillion off the $3.2T crypto market since its peak last month. (
Yahoo Finance
)
Comment
: This slump seems to be cleaning out weaker players. But as prices drop (Bitcoin is now below $90k for the first time in seven months), the risk of contagion into traditional sectors starts to rise.
🇵🇱
POLAND
-
Railway blast.
The security services minister has blamed a “
foreign state
” (wink wink Russia) for an explosion that damaged a Polish railway which ships aid to Ukraine. (
Independent
)
Comment
:
It looks to us like an answer to Ukraine’s remarkable hit on a critical section of Russia’s Trans-Siberian Railway just last week, 6,000km behind the frontlines. It’s also a reminder that while amateurs talk tactics, generals talk logistics.
🇺🇿
UZBEKISTAN
-
Community.
Uzbek leader Shavkat Mirziyoyev is proposing Central Asian countries form a new regional bloc. (
Eurasianet
)
Comment
: This proposed ‘Community of Central Asia’ is yet another sign that the region wants to move beyond its ‘post-Soviet’ label and shape its own destiny.
🇲🇽
MEXICO
-
Protests.
Anti-government protests rocked Mexico City’s central square and National Palace over the weekend, as widespread anger lingers over the assassination of a prominent anti-crime mayor earlier this month. (
NBC
)
Comment
: There are echoes here of the 2011 march across Mexico led by Father Alejandro Solalinde amid shock over extreme cartel violence against migrants. That movement reflected national outrage and captured international attention, but (notwithstanding some reforms) didn’t significantly change the reality on the ground.
Extra Intrigue
Here’s what people around the world are googling:
Folks in
🇮🇳
India
looked up ‘
bus accident Saudi Arabia
’ after a
deadly crash left dozens of Indian pilgrims
dead near Medina.
🇭🇹
Haitians
googled ‘
presidential elections
’ after local outlets reported Haiti’s transitional council has finally
scheduled elections
for August 2026.
And
🇦🇺
Australians
soaked up the latest royal drama, with reports King Charles is planning to
seize the ‘royal corgis
’ from his disgraced ex-prince brother.
Comic relief of the day
Via Daniel Chapo’s Instagram
There’s high-level diplomacy, and then there’s Mozambique President Daniel Chapo, who towers at over 2 metres (6′8″), more than a foot taller than Brazil’s President Lula.
So Lula couldn’t help but throw a sneaky hop into his official COP climate summit welcome for Chapo, making light of their height difference. For his part, Chapo will no doubt welcome any levity, a year after taking office amid deadly protests.
Today’s poll
Which jet would you buy?
🇫🇷 Rafale
🇺🇸 F-35
🇨🇳 J-35
🇪🇺 Eurofighter
🇷🇺 Su-57
✍️ Other (write us!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Would you approve of hosting foreign bases in your country?
👍 Yes, if it helped tackle insecurity (33%)
🛡️ No, it's a violation of sovereignty (64%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (1%)
Your two cents:
✍️
M.S:
“It would depend on who the foreign nations were.”
👍
D.R.J:
“Wouldn't say it's a violation of sovereignty if the country votes to host it. Some countries can't defend themselves.”
🛡️
E.K.H:
“Kinda crazy that so many other countries just let us (the USA) do that, if you think about it. I'd be pretty nervous having a foreign military set up shop in my town, even a friendly one.”