URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/israelhamas-deal-hangs-balance
Title: 🌍 An Israel-Hamas deal hangs in the balance

Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
All eyes were on the Middle East this weekend amid hopes of an imminent
Israel-Hamas truce
.
But as today’s briefing lays out, the Israel-Hamas dynamics aren’t the only ones at play here. A US diplomat told us the recent conversations between US Secretary of State Blinken and his Israeli counterparts have been some of the most confrontational and raw in recent history.
And that’s before we touch on the fracturing within Israel’s ruling coalition, an election year in the US, and emerging divisions within Hamas itself.
We’ll dissect all the events of the weekend in our top story today.
- Helen Zhang, Co-Founder
Was this forwarded to you? We're a team of ex-diplomats producing a concise and engaging geopolitical briefing for 85k+ leaders each day.
It’s free to subscribe
.
TODAY’S NEWS
China’s ‘Two Sessions’ are underway.
We’ll brief you in the coming days on this key annual political and legislative event. In the meantime, one tidbit has already emerged - Premier Li Qiang (nominally China’s number two leader) will not hold a press conference after this year's formalities, breaking a three-decade tradition. The briefing once gave journalists a rare chance to ask questions, and was an opportunity for the premier to build his own public profile. The decision to axe this engagement reflects an increasingly opaque approach from Beijing as it grapples with a host of economic and geopolitical challenges.
OPEC+ to continue production cuts.
The group of oil-producing states has decided to extend its voluntary oil output cut of 2.2 million barrels per day until mid-year, amid concerns around low global demand and prices. Saudi Arabia spearheaded the move together with Russia.
Japan’s stock market index hits new highs.
The Nikkei 225 index just broke the 40,000 barrier for the first time, amid a continued surge in investor optimism, well-performing semiconductor stocks, and a weak yen. But the gains aren’t equally distributed, with several large-cap stocks such as Toyota seeing a fall.
Nikki Haley wins DC primary vote.
Former UN Ambassador Nikki Haley has won the District of Columbia’s Republican primary, her first such win, and breaking former president Donald Trump’s streak of primary victories. Polling suggests Sunday’s results are unlikely to translate into momentum in tomorrow’s ‘Super Tuesday’, when Republican voters in 15 states and one US territory will vote for their preferred candidate.
NATO begins military drills on new member turf.
More than 20,000 soldiers from 13 nations are participating in NATO’s ‘Nordic Response-2024’ military drills, which kicked off today. The exercise will last nearly two weeks, and focuses on war preparedness in NATO’s northern territories, including new members Finland and Sweden, plus founding member Norway.
TOP STORY
An Israel-Hamas deal hangs in the balance
Canva AI prompt: a tense meeting among diplomats [AI policy often blocks images for ‘peace negotiation’]
An Israel-Hamas truce is hanging in the balance right now. Here's what you need to know.
Following weeks of negotiations among US, Egyptian, and Qatari mediators, word
emerged
from US officials over the weekend that
Israel has now "
more or less
" accepted a deal
.
The full details aren't yet public, but the deal sounds similar to the one agreed between Israel and Hamas in November, including a
six-week ceasefire
while:
Hamas releases vulnerable Israeli hostages (the sick, wounded, elderly)
Israel releases (unspecified) Palestinians held in Israeli prisons, and
Israel allows a ramping up of international aid into Gaza.
But ~36 hours before mediation talks were due to resume in Cairo, the Hamas armed wing in Gaza made unverified
claims
that as many as 70 of the ~130 remaining Israeli
hostages have now been killed
by Israel's military response. Hamas also seemed to
suggest
that the “
price
” it will take for Israeli hostages remains unchanged.
Then, another Hamas source again
told
media yesterday (Sunday) it wouldn’t share any hostage details unless Israel agrees to permanently end the war - a non-starter for Israel, which says it’ll keep going until Hamas is dismantled.
So Israel,
citing
a lack of Hamas responses to its requests - for a list of living Israeli hostages, the names of hostages to be released, and the names of Palestinians that Hamas wants released - ended up skipping yesterday’s talks.
And this happened against the backdrop of two other intriguing developments: first,
US Vice President Kamala Harris delivered a
speech
, in a blunt tone and symbolic location (Selma, Alabama), calling on Israel to ease the "
inhumane
" conditions in Gaza - “
no excuses
”. She also again condemned Hamas (see below).
And second, word
emerged
Harris will today (Monday) meet Benny Gantz
in Washington - he’s Israel’s popular former defence minister and army chief, who joined Israel’s unity government after the Hamas attacks last year.
Crucially, Gantz is also a long-time political rival to Prime Minister Netanyahu who, furious over this unauthorised trip and the US red carpet treatment, reportedly ordered the Israeli embassy in DC not to assist with the visit - this is rather unusual in diplomacy.
So in a single weekend, we’ve potentially seen Israel-Hamas negotiations move from the finish line back to the start, while three other different but interrelated shifts play out: in US-Israel ties, Israel’s coalition government, and Hamas itself.
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
It’s worth quickly looking at each of those three dynamics in turn.
First, the US
vice president’s speech
drew attention as the most strident US criticism of Israel since October, though it also looks to us like an election year reframing - rather than revision - of the US approach. Eg, the vice president still called on Hamas to accept the deal on the table and release the hostages, while declaring "
the threat Hamas poses to the people of Israel must be eliminated.
"
Second,
Gantz’s trip to Washington
could've
been a way for Israel to present a more moderate face to the US, and progress talks for how ‘the day after’ might look in Gaza. But with three out of four Israelis
wanting
Netanyahu to resign, and Gantz seemingly taking the trip without authorisation, the prime minister clearly saw it all as something else entirely:
preparation for the ‘day after Netanyahu’
in Israel. Senior Netanyahu supporters are now openly
dunking
on Gantz, leaving the unity government looking more divided than ever.
And third, there’s
Hamas
. Its various demands over the weekend could just be a negotiating tactic. But given they emerged from different Hamas
sources
, they could also reflect divergent views within Hamas about the way forward.
Israeli officials are
telling
Hebrew-language media they suspect the Hamas leader in Gaza, Yahya Sinwar, wants the conflict to continue through Ramadan (which starts next week) as a way to amplify Israel’s isolation. It was a Sinwar-aligned armed wing of Hamas that had issued Friday’s claim about the dead hostages, seemingly undercutting the leverage of the Hamas political wing just hours before the Cairo mediation talks were due to resume.
Also worth noting:
Hamas has previously claimed it doesn’t know how many Israeli hostages are still alive, both because it’s lost contact with its own units in Gaza, and because some hostages are held by other groups.
SUPPORTED BY REMOFIRST
You found the best candidate for the job, but they’re located in another country. To comply with global hiring laws, you would have to establish a new legal entity and hire local experts in that country. Instead, you can let Remofirst handle all the global payroll and HR requirements.
Remofirst raised the biggest Seed round in the industry to make global hiring more affordable.
Learn more.
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇹🇼
Taiwan
: The US has reportedly
deployed special forces
in Taiwan on a permanent basis for the first time, as part of a training mission. Taipei first officially acknowledged the presence of US troops in Taiwan in 2021, though it was a years-long open secret beforehand.
🇪🇺
EU
: Brussels is reportedly helping member countries prepare for a “
worst case scenario
” when a key Ukraine-Russia deal (allowing
Russian gas to reach the EU via Ukraine
) expires in December. Ukraine has said it has no plans to renew the deal, prompting concerns in countries that rely heavily on Russian gas, such as Hungary and Austria.
🇻🇳
Vietnam
: Local Communist Party leaders are
cracking down
on civil society and warning against the dangers of partnerships with foreign governments, according to leaked documents. The party directive flags a risk that foreign influences might “
creat[e] the premise for the formation of domestic political opposition groups
”.
🇭🇹
Haiti
: Prime Minister Ariel Henry, who rose to power after the assassination of President Jovenel Moïse, has agreed to
hold elections by August 2025
. Meanwhile, his government has announced a state of emergency after gangs stormed the country’s main prison.
🇮🇷
Iran
: Turnout in Friday’s parliamentary elections
hit a record low
of 40.6%, suggesting widespread dissatisfaction with the regime, and undermining its claims to popular legitimacy. These were the first elections since Iran’s mass anti-government protests of 2022.
EXTRA INTRIGUE
🤣
Your weekly roundup of the world’s lighter news
A Canadian lawyer is under investigation after allegedly
using ChatGPT to make up fake cases
to use in her legal research.
A French satirical tabloid which is only
published on leap years
just celebrated its 12th-ever edition.
Dubai has hosted its
first-ever jet suit race
, where folks in Iron Man-like suits race across a water course to the finish line.
Up to 27 ultra-rare collectable cards featuring hockey superstar Wayne Gretzky as a rookie could be hiding in an
unopened lot of collection cards
, which sold for $3.72M at auction last week.
A runaway train in India has somehow travelled
driverless for 70km
(40 miles) at high speeds before coming to a stop.
And angry parents in Scotland have requested a refund after a
Willy Wonka experience
turned out to be a bleakly decorated warehouse (complete with some unhappy Oompa-Loompas).
LAWSUIT OF THE DAY
Elon Musk launching a lawsuit isn’t always newsworthy, but it is when the Tesla CEO and Twitter owner sues OpenAI, a global AI pioneer. The billionaire is accusing OpenAI (which he helped found) of abandoning its original mission of an open-source technology free from profit pressures, by allying with tech giant Microsoft. Musk is hoping to compel OpenAI to make all its research and technology freely accessible to the public.
DAILY POLL
Do you think tech companies should make their tech freely available to the public?
💻 Yes, it would benefit society as a whole
💰 No, why would anyone invest in new tech for free?
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Last Thursday’s poll:
Should the West use frozen Russian assets to buy weapons for Ukraine?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
⚖️ Yes, it's only fair (68%)
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
💸
No, it’s a double-edged sword and will trigger a free-for-all (29%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!)  (3%)
Your two cents:
⚖️
O:
“It's morally and economically appropriate to use Russian profits to bolster Ukraine's defences against Russian aggression.”
💸
S.P:
“Freezing Russia's assets to preclude their use to kill Ukrainians is one thing; stealing Russia's assets in order to kill Russians is quite another and is an act of war itself.”
⚖️
C.B:
“There is an argument that the money could also be applied to rebuild damage in Ukraine caused by Russian air raids.”
✍️
E:
“These assets belong to the Russian people. Putin won't be there forever.”
Share the Intrigue