URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/another-plot-twist-argentinas-elections
Title: 🌍 Another plot twist in Argentina's elections

Today’s newsletter supported by:
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
You’d think if you scored an invite to a French aristocratic banquet in the 1700s, you’d be in for a real treat. But Antoine-Augustin Parmentier just served his guests potatoes. Endless potatoes. He was on a mission to popularise the spud, and he won: the Paris Faculty of Medicine officially
declared potatoes ‘edible’
in 1772.
Today’s briefing is a 5 min read:
🇦🇷
Another plot twist out of
Argentina
.
🇨🇳
China
restricts its graphite exports.
➕
Plus:
Gaza from above, how the papers are covering the arrest of Vietnamese rare earth executives, and a high-stakes errand in Thailand.
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇮🇩
Indonesia
:
Defence Minister Prabowo
announced
last night (Sunday) he’s running for president in 2024, with the outgoing president’s 36-year-old son as his running mate. Last week, a court
loosened rules
that required candidates to be 40 years or older.
🇪🇺
European Union
:
The top two EU leaders, Ursula von der Leyen and Charles Michel, visited the White House for talks on Friday. The
EU-US Summit
sought to project a united EU-US front in the Middle East and Ukraine.
🇨🇳
China
:
The Pentagon estimated last week that
China’s nuclear arsenal
now includes around 500 warheads, with an aim to triple that number by 2035. Russia has the most warheads in the world at around 6,000, followed by the US with around 5,500.
🇻🇪
Venezuela
: The opposition yesterday held its first presidential primary since 2012, with a view to ending Nicolas Maduro’s decade-long rule next year.
A government-imposed server blockage
has reportedly delayed the vote count, and authorities recently barred the opposition frontrunner from office.
🇨🇫
Central African Republic
: The International Criminal Court has
dropped charges
against a regional militia leader, citing a lack of evidence and available witnesses. The defendant stood accused of committing war crimes during an ethnic conflict in 2013 and 2014.
🇦🇷
A
rgentina | Elections
A screengrab from Argentinian TV as initial results were announced last night.
Image courtesy of TN.
Another plot twist out of Argentina
The ruling, left-leaning Peronist coalition had a surprise win in Argentina’s first-round presidential election yesterday (Sunday). But since no candidate won enough votes, there’ll now be a final run-off election next month.
Why the surprise?
Argentina's economy is a mess. Since 2012, it's spent more time in recession than out. Inflation (138%) and poverty (40%) are both at recent record highs.
So few expected the ruling party to be asked back, and the president didn't bother seeking re-election. Even his own vice president
blamed
him (
🇦🇷
).
In that context
, 12 of the past 14 leading polls projected a victory for the outsider opposition candidate, Milei. Tapping into popular discontent, his brash style and unorthodox ideas captured voter attention:
We’re talking big hair, epic sideburns, a former rock singer life,
huge cloned dogs
, ripping
an actual chainsaw
at rallies, smashing a '
central bank piñata
' on live TV,
viral Tiktok videos
, etc
His ideas include abolishing various ministries, and replacing the peso with the US dollar (like in Ecuador and El Salvador). The vibe was there in his campaign slogan: "
I didn't come to guide lambs, I came to wake up lions.
"
He had a
surprise win
in August's primaries and was
mobbed by crowds
yesterday. But this momentum might've also propelled him to cross what many Argentinians consider red lines, like:
referring to Pope Francis (a fellow Argentinian) as "
evil
", and
reopening
wounds
from Argentina's bitter 1970s dictatorship.
Even the Pope
himself felt compelled to
throw some thinly veiled shade
back at Milei last week. And getting into a public biff with the Pope is not generally considered a vote-winning strategy in Argentina.
So Massa seems to have benefited
from voter hesitancy towards Milei, while doubling down on his own social spending (something Milei vows to cut) and leveraging his dominant party machine (something Milei lacks).
With the third (centre-right) candidate gone, voters now return to the polls on 19 November to choose between Massa and Milei as their next president.
Intrigue's take:
Elections love a good 'momentum' story, but it'd be a brave and breathless commentator to suggest the Peronists now have momentum. Despite winning this round, it's still potentially the party's worst ever result.
And if Milei (a one-man party) ends up winning next month, he'll have a remarkable lack of party power behind him.
So both Massa and Milei struck a conciliatory tone at post-election rallies last night, seeking to woo third-party voters ahead of the final round.
But no matter who wins next month, they’ll be limping rather than roaring into the presidency. And the markets are already pricing in a
95% chance
they’ll (again) have to default on Argentina's debt.
Also worth noting:
To win in the first round, a candidate needed 45% of the vote, or 40% but with a winning margin of 10% or more.
📰
How newspapers covered…
Vietnam’s arrests of rare earth industry professionals
London, UK
“Vietnam arrests rare earth industry officials, casting shadow over plans to rival China ”
Singapore
“Vietnam arrests 6 people, seizes 13,715 tonnes of ore in rare earth case”
Hanoi, Vietnam
“Thái Dương Group Joint Stock Company’s head detained for illegally exploiting, consuming rare earth ores”
Today’s newsletter is supported by: Blinkist
Key insights in under 15 minutes!
Key ideas from bestselling non-fiction books, distilled by experts into bitesize text and audio. Explore our vast library of over 5,500 titles and stay up-to-date with 40 new titles that are added each month. Join the reading revolution!
Start your free trial today
🇨🇳
China | Geo-economics
China tightens its mineral exports (again)
China’s commerce and customs authorities
announced new graphite export controls
(
🇨🇳
) on Friday (20 October).
Graphite isn’t just for grade school pencils
. It’s also a key component in batteries, electric motors, and nuclear reactors - all things the world needs for its energy transition.
And China’s got a lot of it. In fact, according to the
US Geological Survey
, China produces around two-thirds of the world’s graphite and refines 90% of the spherical graphite used to produce EV battery anodes.
Intrigue’s take:
We doubt it’s a coincidence these controls came just a few days after the US announced
additional curbs on AI chip sales
to China.
Right as the US is seeking to grow its share of the global EV market, Beijing is using its
rare earths dominance
to signal it can tap Washington’s brakes. Its message? Trade wars cut both ways, so back off.
But we don’t see the US backtracking now. So our message? Maybe invest in graphite suppliers in Brazil, Madagascar, Mozambique, Tanzania and Turkey.
Also worth noting:
China introduced similar controls on gallium and germanium in July. It didn’t
export any
of the two metals the following month.
➕
Extra Intrigue
Your weekly roundup of the world’s more surprising news
Polish police have arrested a
thief who posed as a mannequin
to rob a jewellery store after hours.
A Thai ambulance driver has come under criticism after
stopping to purchase fried bananas
while taking a patient to hospital (in his defence, he somehow completed the banana errand in 3 seconds).
In Canada, locals have rescued a giant tortoise they described as “
bigger than the platter you’d use to serve 24 people a Thanksgiving turkey
”, after
the endangered African reptile was dumped
in a field of bok choy.
A hungry bear has broken into a Connecticut home to
help herself to some frozen lasagne
.
And the world now has a
new hottest chilli
after America’s Pepper X dethroned the reigning champion, the Carolina Reaper.
🗳️ Poll time!
Who would you have supported in Argentina's presidential election yesterday?
📈 Sergio Massa, current economy minister
⚡ Javier Milei, populist libertarian
👩‍💼 Patricia Bullrich, former security minister
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
🗺️ Map of the day
Credits: The Washington Post
Israel continues to bombard targets in the Gaza Strip following the deadly Hamas terrorist attacks of 7 October. The Israeli Air Force says it dropped about
6,000 bombs
in the first week of the war, with one
satellite analysis
suggesting 4.3% of the enclave’s buildings were destroyed that same week.
UN agencies
confirmed
a first humanitarian delivery into Gaza on Saturday, followed by a
second
yesterday (Sunday).
Thursday’s poll:
Which drugs policy would you enact
first
?
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️
🧲
More customs scans at ports  (18%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️
🤝
More collaboration with countries of origin (24%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
💊
Work on decreasing drug demand  (36%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
👮
Bolster law enforcement  (6%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🧪
Crack down on local production  (7%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!) (9%)
Your two cents
:
✍️
J.B:
“Make drugs legal… Regulate them to significantly reduce risks for users, tax them to create a government fund to help those who are in need such as the people who are addicted.”
✍️
D.K:
“Invest in AI / Blockchain technology that automates the screening of cargo at a mass scale.”
🤝
U.S:
“A better collaboration with countries of origin should include a better collaboration with the intermediate parties in charge of transporting those shipments.”