URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/another-coup-for-thailand-2467b1a271dac625
Title: 🌍 Another coup for Thailand?

Today’s briefing:
— Wild intrigue in Thailand
— Calling all European astronauts
— Get a tan at this consulate
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. By far my favourite thing about Intrigue is the growing community of Intriguers around the world. From happy hour social catch-ups to long emails volunteering advice on our marketing strategy (thank you!), it’s a real treat to meet and learn from you all.
We also often get on-the-ground anecdotes about some very real things happening in geopolitics. I learned about one from a reader over dimsum dinner just last night (go to Tim Ho Wan in NYC and thank me later).
Apparently, the red alerts in Ukraine to warn of incoming attacks are announced by none other than Mark Hamill (Luke Skywalker), and end with him saying “
may the force be with you
”.
Anyway, on to today’s story on
the big Thailand-Cambodia spat
.
PS
- We’ll be taking
a quick break
this Friday, but will be back in your inbox on Monday!
Number of the day
51-50
That’s the vote split that advanced President Trump’s
Big Beautiful Bill,
with VP Vance casting the tie-breaker to send it back to the House for a final vote as soon as today (Wednesday).
If the coup fits…
Thailand’s suspended PM, Paetongtarn Shinawatra
You’re chatting away on the phone after a crappy few weeks at work: yep, Jenny from accounts is at it again, and don’t even get us started on Barry from marketing.
So you vent, throw a little shade, maybe sprinkle in some spice — it’s a private call. You do you, right?
Wrong
.
Thailand’s prime minister tried that last month, and she’s now effectively out of a job because someone recorded then leaked her call, triggering a political soap opera with more twists and turns than the Ha Giang Loop.
But Thai politics not your thing? We’ve gone ahead and adapted this to screen for you, borrowing (and mildly bastardising?) Hollywood’s classic script structure for extra pizzazz:
Ordinary world
Sure, Thailand and Cambodia have had their differences over the years, but these two neighbours were mostly pretty tight. Cambodia’s Hun Sen once described his Thai counterpart (Shinawatra senior) as his “
godbrother
” — they even did golf together!
Inciting incident
But then in May of this year, something went horribly wrong: the details remain unclear, but basically Thai and Cambodian troops crossed paths in a disputed, un-demarcated border area — shots were fired, and one Cambodian soldier ended up dead.
Refusal of the call
There were initial glimmers of hope that maybe diplomacy would help de-escalate this thing: the new leaders (children of the godbrothers above) were in contact within hours, and further talks among generals got everyone retreating back to last year’s positions.
But something wasn’t
quite
right…
While
saying
all the right things about diplomacy, these two (dare we say it… yes, we’re gonna say it) nepo-babies also quietly deployed additional troops and heavy weapons. And then the diplomacy wheels started to wobble:
Cambodia
wanted the International Court of Justice to help draw the border, but
Thailand
just wanted to figure it out between the two of them (Thailand is the bigger player, while the ICJ has previously ruled in Cambodia’s favour), until…
Act 1 turning point
The young Thai PM (Paetongtarn Shinawatra) tried to bypass her Cambodian counterpart, instead calling the guy’s dad and Cambodia’s ✌️former✌️ leader, Hun Sen.
But you know what?
Hun Sen was recording the call!
All 17 minutes of it. And he shared a copy not just with his now ✌️in-charge✌️ son but at least 80 other top Cambodian generals and officials, one of whom (if not Hun Sen himself) then leaked it.
Tests, allies, and enemies
Turns out this was
a massive deal
because, in amongst milking her family ties to stop this thing ending up at the ICJ, the young Thai PM used the call with Hun Sen to dunk on her own general, referring to him as “
an opponent
”, saying he handled the whole border thing poorly, and suggesting he “
just wanted to look cool
”.
And that is an extremely spicy thing to do in Thailand, where the military-monarchy establishment is a sensitive issue and still effectively controls most key institutions. Her own dad and aunt both learned this the hard way by getting ousted in military coups!
Point of no return
Of course, Cambodia’s Hun Sen knew all this. And that’s why he (or someone in his circle) leaked the call,
torching decades of cross-border family ties
to presumably trigger the young Shinawatra’s ouster and clear the way for a favourable ICJ ruling.
And lest there be any doubt, Hun Sen spelled it out on
Facebook
(he’s 72): "
In my opinion, Thailand will have a new prime minister in the next three months, and I know in advance who will be the prime minister, but I won't say it, leaving it to the imagination
".
Final push
Thailand’s PM tried to play it all off as mere negotiation tactics (and Hun Sen’s predictions as just trolling), but the damage was done. One of the
many
parties holding her coalition together withdrew, and protestors started calling for her resignation.
Climax
Then on Monday, Thailand’s constitutional court — which, let’s be honest, answers to the military-monarchy honchos — suspended the PM from her duties pending an ethics investigation. That’s the same court that used the same ethics tool to remove her predecessor less than a year ago, and it’ll now inevitably be her own fate, too.
Cliffhanger, shamelessly hinting at a sequel
But here’s the thing: Thailand has had
22
coup attempts
— 13 successful — since the constitutional monarchy got started in 1932 (itself thanks to…
🥁
a coup).
And in a nod to Hollywood’s sequel-obsessed lack of originality, Thailand’s coups are now just re-hashing the same script: the coups that yoinked Paetongtarn’s dad (2006) and aunt (2014) also started with border clashes, followed by accusations they were going soft on national security, then a bit of whipping up of nationalism and unrest until — yoink.
But even if the coming sequel
doesn’t
involve a coup, we’re still left with:
Tensions
between two neighbours in an already volatile ‘hood (hi Myanmar)
Instability
in Thailand, in turn hitting its economy (shares are down 20%)
Trade disruption
not only to their $5B cross-border ties, but broader regional supply chains across auto, garments, and electronics, and
Border closures
hitting the million-odd Cambodian migrant workers in Thailand.
So don’t let anyone yawn in your face about this latest Thai political intrigue. Just add that touch of Hollywood pizzazz.
Intrigue’s Take
So what can we learn from all this?
First
, never assume a
sensitive
conversation is just between you and them. Never. If the other side isn’t quietly taking notes, they’re not doing their job.
Second
, don’t assume your
personal
connection can solve something alone. To the contrary, it can become a liability if the other side wants (and you’re careless).
Third
,
nationalism
is a powerful yet unpredictable creature. Those unresolved grievances you thought were kinda fading into history? Well now there are keyboard warriors whipping up outrage over who invented Khon dance.
And
fourth
, there’s always
leverage
available. Whether it’s Thailand’s 186 state-owned gas stations in Cambodia, or the threat of an ICJ case, or the vast number of Cambodians relying on the Thai labour market. There’s no single upper hand.
Anyway, stay tuned for the sequel [in deep voice] “
this summerrrrrrrrrrrr…
”
Intrigue presents:
“By 2042, 95% of humanity's energy usage will be downstream of solar"
That’s a big claim, and it comes from physicist, engineer, fellow Intriguer, and the founder of Terraform Industries, now making fuel out of thin air,
Dr Casey Handmer
.
Don’t miss our chat with Casey! It’s online, Thursday July 10th.
Join here
!
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇮🇱
ISRAEL
-
A ceasefire on the horizon?
According to President Trump, Israel has accepted the “
necessary conditions
” for a 60-day ceasefire with Hamas, though neither side has commented yet. (
BBC
)
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
It’s leg day (Quads).
The Quad foreign ministers (US, India, Japan, Australia) have met in Washington to launch their new critical minerals initiative, aimed at diversifying supply chains away from China, which currently holds a near monopoly. (
Joint statement
)
Comment:
Perhaps unsurprisingly, while Western media highlighted the China / critical minerals angle, Indian outlets concentrated on the Quad’s condemnation of April’s terror attack which triggered the India-Pakistan showdown.
🇦🇿
AZERBAIJAN
-
Ties tank.
Russia-Azerbaijan ties have soured again after Russian police mounted a mass raid in Yekaterinburg that resulted in the deaths of two ethnic Azeris. Azerbaijan is now opening a case into alleged torture, arguing the Russians targeted the brothers over their ethnicity. (
RFL
)
Comment:
You might recall Russia actually shot down an Azerbaijani passenger jet in December, killing 38. And while (unlike after the downing of MH17) Putin quickly expressed regret, Baku is now taking legal action, and even snubbed Putin’s big WWII parade in May. It’s a reflection not only of Azerbaijan’s rising clout, but also Putin’s eroding grip over the old Soviet sphere while he puts everything on Ukraine.
🇵🇱
POLAND
-
Passport please.
Warsaw is resuming border checks with Germany and Lithuania from Monday amid reports Germany (which already resumed its own checks) was redirecting unlawful migrants to Poland, claims Berlin denies. (
Euractiv
)
Comment:
It’s another blow to the EU’s dream of border-free travel, with irregular migration a constant source of friction among the bloc’s capitals. Meanwhile, there are lingering claims Moscow might be facilitating irregular migrant flows as a way to destabilise, divide, and thereby weaken the EU.
🇮🇳
INDIA
-
Dalai Lama’s big 90th mic drop?
All eyes are on the Dalai Lama’s remarks before his 90th birthday on Sunday, as speculation grows he might offer hints about a potential successor. (
Strait Times
)
Comment:
That’s edgy because Beijing views him as a separatist and insists China will choose his successor. China even kidnapped the six-year-old Panchen Lama (a key succession figure) in 1995 — he’s still missing! So if the India-based Dalai suggests his successor will be born in India (rather than China-occupied Tibet), expect India-China ties to get rocky, fast. We wrote about the geopolitics of the Dalai Lama
here
.
🇨🇷
COSTA RICA
-
President faces the heat.
The top court in Costa Rica is pushing the legislature to strip President Chaves of his immunity on grounds he corruptly granted contracts to a close associate. (
AP
)
🇲🇱
MALI
-
Insurgency threat.
Al Qaeda-linked jihadis have simultaneously attacked three military sites in Mali as various like-minded groups in the Sahel try to gain access to West Africa’s coastline — local juntas recently shuttered US and French counter-terrorism bases. (
BBC
)
Extra Intrigue
The Intrigue jobs board
💼
Policy Officer
@
European Space Agency
in Paris
Chief Financial Officer
@
Open Technology Fund
in Washington, D.C.
Humanitarian Affairs Advisor
@
International Red Cross
in Brussels
Foreign Trade Specialist
@
Mahle
in Shanghai
Consulate of the day
Credits: Miller Hull.
Before you limber up for your first cannonball into the pool above, you’ll need to befriend a diplomat at the US consulate in Mexico’s Guadalajara city, where the State Department inaugurated this shiny new 12,000-square-metre mission just last year.
We assume the consular team occasionally takes a break between visas to bronze the rig by the pool? Anyway, the architects
described
it all as a “
physical representation of the long-term commitment to the US-Mexico relationship
”. Last year feels long ago.
Today’s poll
Have you ever lived through a coup?
🪖 Yep, here's what happened...
🙅 Nope (say no more)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
What's a sci-fi you think Intriguers would dig?
👽 Arrival (18%)
🪱
Dune (29%)
🛸
The Three-Body Problem (21%)
👾
District 9 (15%)
🌆
Elysium (6%)
🚀
Embassytown (3%)
✍️ Other (Write in!) (8%)
Your two cents:
🪱
K.M:
“
Dune
is entertaining with a touch of whimsical futuristic commodity intrigue.”
🛸
P.S:
“Rooted in a natively Asian perspective, and yet boldly imaginative on what it means to be a sentient life form in a ‘
dark
’ universe.”
🚀
E.W:
“While there is some diplomatic intrigue in
Embassytown
, it’s largely backdrop for China Mieville’s brilliant exploration of language and cognition.”
✍️
S.M:
“
A Memory Called Empire
- literally about space diplomats!”
🛸
R.L:
“Sounds like the kind of novel that would be adored by self-consciously intelligent, pretentious people, so they could namedrop it at literary salons or whatever.” [Editor’s note: guilty]