URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/apples-supply-chains-hit-global-economic-slowdown-chinas-covidzero-policy
Title: Apple's supply chains hit by global economic slowdown and China's Covid-Zero policy.

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Mark Zuckerberg fired 11,000 employees last week, while Salesforce and Redfin cut around 1,000 each. And yet, massive layoffs that would normally dominate Western news cycles squeaked by unnoticed thanks to the meltdown of the
Ponzi scheme
crypto exchange FTX, whatever Elon Musk is doing to Twitter, the surprising results of the US midterms, and
the heart-warming scenes from Ukraine
as Kherson was liberated by Ukrainian forces
. Living in interesting times is
exhausting.
Today’s briefing is a ~4.9 min read:
🍎
Apple and China:
headwinds ahead.
➕ Plus:
Nepal prepares for an election, Kazakhstan and the EU sign a green hydrogen agreement, and Legoland brought down the South Korean credit market.
📰 GLOBAL HEADLINES
Stories:
De Standaard
,
The Globe and Mail
,
Rasmei Kampuchea
,
Sermitsiaq
,
Daily Nation
🤿 DEEP DIVE
China’s poison Apple
In brief:
Apple has warned customers they’ll have to wait to get the newest iPhone model because China’s Covid restrictions have impacted its manufacturing capacity.
Depending so heavily on one country for its manufacturing operations seems to contradict Apple CEO Tim Cook’s ‘doctrine’, but manufacturing its higher-end products in China remains Apple’s best (and perhaps only) option.
Credit: Dazeinfo Briefs.
No phone for you
If you were hoping to treat yourself to a new iPhone 14 Pro this holiday season, prepare to be disappointed.
In a
statement
published last week, Apple warned customers that “
COVID-19 restrictions have temporarily impacted the primary iPhone 14 Pro and iPhone 14 Pro Max assembly facility located in Zhengzhou, China. C
ustomers will experience longer wait times to receive their new products.”
This is the second time this year that Apple has cut its production forecasts
due to Coronavirus outbreaks and China’s lockdown rules.
Earlier this year, Apple lost $4B in revenue when factories near Shanghai closed for a city-wide lockdown.
The ‘Tim Cook doctrine’
While Apple has tried to shift its manufacturing away from China in recent years, almost 90% of its iPhones are still reportedly produced in China.
That seemingly contradicts Apple CEO Tim Cook’s own risk management doctrine.
During a 2009 earnings call, Cook laid out his
vision
for Apple’s supply chain:
❝
“We believe that we need to own and control the primary technologies behind the products we make, and participate only in markets where we can make a significant contribution.”
So, why did Apple put all of its err... apples... in the same basket?
Caught in the middle
For at least the last fifteen years, the ‘designed in California, made in China’ model has helped Apple become the largest company in the world.
In return, Apple employed hundreds of thousands of Chinese workers, and the Chinese government gained leverage over one of the most important tech companies in the world.
The arrangement has worked out perfectly for all concerned, but as analyst
Matthew Turpin
explains, the winds of change are blowing:
❝
“Apple is discovering that geopolitics drive business models — not the other way around [...] This whole collection of supply chain risks are creating a real liability for them.”
Besides the domestic risk of doing business in China, Apple is also exposed to the fallout of the China-US economic decoupling.
Last month, the Biden Administration prohibited US companies from exporting the technology and equipment used to produce advanced chips to China.
Any Chinese retaliation could catch Apple in the crossfire
, although Beijing hasn’t announced any specific measures.
Apple just can't quit China
Some security experts like
Nathan Freitas
argue that Apple and the Chinese Communist Party’s visions aren’t dissimilar:
❝
“Apple’s vision of a controlled, locked-down ecosystem for the customer experience maps into the same vision, the same control, that the Communist party wants to have in China.”
The bottom line:
Whether you agree with that take or not, the simple fact is that Apple can’t leave China in the near term. Producing Apple’s higher-end products requires advanced manufacturing techniques that places like India or Vietnam can’t yet replicate.
🤝 SPONSORED BY POCKET CASTS
Feature packed
All the features you need in a podcasting app without any of the bloat.
Pick up exactly where you left off in your favorite podcast. Find brand new ones to fall in love with. Podcast listening turned up to 11.
Take a listen, and see for yourself.
🔦 REGIONAL SPOTLIGHT
North & Central Asia
🇨🇳 China
Chinese
exports have declined
for the first time since 2020, thanks to the global economic slowdown and its own Covid-zero policy.
Exports fell by 0.3% in October compared to the previous year, back when economists were forecasting growth.
🇯🇵 Japan
Japanese steel giant Nippon Steel is pouring billions of dollars into two new projects to
expand its operations in India
.
While Japanese demand for steel is predicted to decline, Indian demand is forecasted to grow well into the next decade.
🇰🇿 Kazakhstan
Kazakhstan and the EU have agreed on a ‘
strategic partnership
’ in the areas of raw materials and green hydrogen.
While Kazakhstan is well known for its oil and mineral resources, it is now aiming to also become a world leader in green hydrogen production.
🇳🇵 Nepal
Nepalese citizens will choose between two major coalitions in the country’s
federal and provincial elections
later this month.
The opposing coalitions disagree on some foreign policies, but agree that Nepal should remain independent and non-aligned in their dealings with India, China, and the US.
🇹🇼 Taiwan
Taiwan is looking to
sign a trade agreement with the UK
and deepen its ties with Rishi Sunak’s government.
The statement was issued during the UK Minister of State for Trade Greg Hands’ visit to Taipei.
🗞 IN OTHER NEWS...
Legoland Korea comes crashing down
Looks like these legolads are out of jobs. Credit: Legoland Korea.
The news:
The developer of Legoland Korea, a theme park built to celebrate the famous brick toys, defaulted last month, sending the
South Korean credit market into something of a panic
.
Plans for Legoland Korea crumbled after the new Gangwon provincial government announced it would not pay for what it said was the previous administration’s “
vanity project
”.
The Gangwon government has since said it will take on the developer’s debts to ensure that any panic over South Korea’s bond markets doesn’t spread.
Why it matters:
Rising interest rates and the global economic slowdown is making it harder for South Korean companies to sell bonds and restructure their debt.
According to
Hwang Se-woon
, an analyst at Korea Capital Market Institute:
❝
“The credit squeeze came earlier than expected as the Legoland default shook the entire bond market”.
What’s next:
Global interest rates are predicted to
peak in Q1 2023
, which means we might be looking at a few more corporate defaults before the end of next year.
But it’s not only corporate defaults that are worrying investors:
the Financial Times reported last week
that “
the cost to insure five-year sovereign debt against default has almost doubled since mid-September
”.
All of this is bad news for the South Korean economy, which is expected to go into recession next year.
STORIES WE ALMOST COVERED
Here's how 540 of your fellow Intriguers voted last week:
What should we have covered?
🟨🟨⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 1. 🇵🇰 Pakistan was removed from the global terrorism financing list (14.1%)
🟩🟩🟩🟩🟩🟩 2. 🇨🇳 China is accused of setting up illegal police stations abroad (33.9%)
🟨⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 3. 🇷🇺 Russia is recruiting former Afghan commandos (8.6
%
)
🟨🟨🟨🟨⬜️⬜️ 4. 🇬🇷 Rising Greece-Turkey tensions are bad news for Europe and NATO (23.7%)
🟨🟨🟨⬜️⬜️⬜️ 5. 🇨🇳 China’s World Internet Conference and its vision for a new internet (19.7%)
China’s police stations abroad
In brief:
Fourteen countries
have opened investigations into a series of Chinese “service” offices acting as overseas police stations - The Guardian has a good overview of the story
here
.
In addition to offering a range of diplomatic services, these stations also engage in operations to influence and intimidate Chinese nationals abroad, according to NGO Safeguard Defenders.
A few thoughts from the team:
China recently passed a new law allowing its enforcement agencies to pursue suspects of telecom and online fraud abroad. According to
China Daily
, “
public security organs have persuaded 210,000 fraud suspects to return from abroad
” to face fraud charges. Even a generous reading of this statement raises more questions about how China’s security services operate in other countries than it answers.
- Helen
According to the Safeguard Defenders report, there are over 110 overseas police stations in at least 21 countries. In many cases, the stations were located in countries that already have extradition agreements with China, like Brazil and Mongolia. If this was really about going after criminals, why not go through the official channels?
- Valentina
It’s clear the Chinese Communist Party considers it has jurisdiction over all Chinese nationals, regardless of where they live. None of this is new; I recall in 2017 when Australia
cancelled a proposed extradition agreement
with China at the 11th hour over concerns it could be used to persecute Xi Jinping’s political enemies. Over the next few years, I wouldn’t be surprised to see China push the diplomatic boundaries even further when it comes to controlling the behaviour of Chinese citizens overseas.
- John
What did you think of today's newsletter?
😍 Loved it!
🫤 Meh.
👎 It wasn't for me.
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate