URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/biden-considers-dropping-assange-charges
Title: 🌍 Biden considers dropping Assange charges

IN TODAY’S EDITION
1️⃣ Could Assange walk free?
2️⃣ Italy’s Gandalf-level smoke rings
3️⃣ Vietnam’s record-shattering bank fraud
Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
In 1912, the Mayor of Tokyo gave Washington D.C. thousands of cherry trees that have since become an iconic fixture of the
city’s spring landscape
.
During his visit to the US capital this week, the Japanese prime minister in turn pledged to give the city 250 more cherry trees as a sign of the two allies’
“timeless, inspiring and thriving friendship”
(President Biden’s words, not mine). The visit is well-timed, too, because D.C.’s ‘
Sakura Matsuri
’ festival - the largest Japanese cultural festival in the US - kicks off this weekend.
In other news, President Biden found time between his hosting duties this week to send #natsec Twitter/X into a tizzy by hinting
the US may drop its pursuit of Julian Assange
. That’s the topic of our lead story today.
PS -
Do you live around DC?
Join us
for a drink on April 24!
THE HEADLINES
Kishida gives the US a pep talk.
Japanese Prime Minister Fumio
Kishida has told Congress
,
“I detect an undercurrent of self-doubt among some Americans about what your role in the world should be
". But he said the world still needs the US to play its “
pivotal role
”, especially when “
freedom and democracy are currently under threat around the globe
”. His remarks come as Congressional gridlock halts the delivery of military aid to Ukraine, Israel, and Taiwan.
Countries rush to warn Iran against Israel attack.
Germany, Russia, and the UK have all urged Iran to
show restraint
in response to the Israeli strike on its Damascus embassy compound earlier this month. But sources cited by top media outlets are still making different claims on where this is all headed, ranging from “
a direct attack from Iran
” on Israel as soon as today (Friday), through to a more “
limited
” response, and even “
no decision yet
”.
Russia destroys Kyiv power plant.
A series of Russian airstrikes
destroyed a major power station
near Kyiv yesterday. The attack prompted renewed calls for help from President Zelensky: “
We need air defence systems and other defence assistance, not just turning a blind eye and having lengthy discussions
”.
China’s exports tank.
Exports for the month of March
fell by 7.5%
in dollar terms from a year earlier, according to China’s customs authority - well below expectations. Beijing’s hopes for a stronger recovery hinge largely on more world demand for its exports.
Mexico wants Ecuador suspended from the UN.
Mexico’s president says his country’s complaint to the International Court of Justice asks it to
suspend Ecuador
from the UN until Ecuador issues a public apology for raiding Mexico’s embassy last week. The widely condemned raid was to arrest a former Ecuadorian vice-president on more corruption charges.
ECB keeps rates steady.
The European Central Bank has kept its
4% interest rate steady
for the fifth time in a row, but it’s hinting a cut may arrive in June. Meanwhile, the latest US inflation data shows prices increasing by 3.5% for the year to March, throwing cold water on the market’s hopes for an imminent Fed cut.
TOP STORY
Could the US let WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange walk free?
Photo credits: Corbis/Vogue.
President Joe Biden just
said
the US is “
considering
” Australia’s request to end the pursuit of WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange, a move that could close over 14 years of legal and diplomatic drama.
Julian Assange
has been the subject of
multiple investigations and charges, not to mention countless books, articles, and movies (though even Benedict Cumberbatch’s solid Australian accent couldn’t save
The Fifth Estate
).
Assange, an Australian citizen, founded Wikileaks in 2006 with the motto "
The method is transparency, the goal is justice
". Its priority was to shine a light on “
oppressive regimes
”, with a nod to “
unethical behaviour
” in the West, too.
But Assange’s profile exploded as his organisation’s focus shifted further to the West, with
(in)famous
leaks
from 2010 and beyond including
:
A video from a US helicopter gunship showing the crew killing several unarmed civilians in Iraq
390,000 US Army field reports from Iraq
91,000 US documents related to the war in Afghanistan, and
250,000 classified US diplomatic cables from 1966 up to 2010.
The same year, authorities in
Sweden
(where Assange had spent some time) issued an arrest warrant on allegations (which he denies) of sexual assault, and the UK’s supreme court went on to authorise his extradition to Sweden in 2012.
That’s when Assange entered Ecuador’s embassy in London
disguised as a motorbike courier
, claiming asylum on the grounds that the Swedish allegations were just a pretext to hand him over to the US (which hadn’t yet laid charges).
So Ecuador’s left-leaning government at the time
let him live in the embassy
while Wikileaks went on to drop more leaks. These included leaks around the 2016 US election, plus an epic ‘Vault 7’ leak which the CIA
said
was the largest in the agency’s history.
And as Assange’s influence grew,
Russia
reportedly
planned to exfiltrate him
to Moscow, while the US reportedly looked at ‘extraordinary rendition’ and beyond.
A new government in Ecuador then
revoked Assange’s asylum
in 2019 and allowed the UK - who’d waited
seven years
rather than ‘
pull an Ecuador
’ - to hoist Assange out and off to a high-security prison, where he remains.
On the very same day, the US unsealed
multiple criminal charges
for Assange’s “
alleged role in one of the largest compromises of classified information in the history of the US
”. Assange claims the charges are politically motivated.
Either way, that’s
a lot
of international intrigue for a skinny guy from Down Under.
So why would the US drop everything now?
Different folks have different reasons to want Assange released, including:
Diplomatic
: it’s become an irritant for US allies (Australia and the UK)
Philosophical
: did he commit sins, or just expose them?
Legal
: his defenders chant “
journalism is not a crime
”
Humanitarian
: his physical and mental health is crumbling; and
Political
: he’s now lionised in some political camps, including for the reasons above.
What’s next?
Last month his lawyers won a partial victory when a UK court ruled he couldn’t be extradited unless the US guarantees he won’t face the death penalty. Subject to how the US responds, the next hearing is scheduled for 20 May.
So for now? The US is “
considering
” its approach.
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
Take your pick: Assange is either a truth-seeking, wrong-exposing missile of journalistic righteousness, now
martyred by an embarrassed deep state
. Or he’s a hacker and predator who
broke the law, harmed democracies
, put individuals at risk, and aided (wittingly or otherwise) autocracies like Russia.
From our own time on the inside, we’ll say this:
helping someone breach a classified system (as Assange allegedly did)
sounds like a crime
, and
any of us
lucky enough to live in the free world
will have benefited from many official secrets kept, and some exposed.
So to us, there’s probably a way out that honours the above principles - perhaps a
deal
that holds Assange to account for facilitating (if not publishing) the leaks, while recognising that Assange has already done time, and his Wikileaks has faded from relevance.
Also worth noting:
Assange
pleaded guilty
to 24 Australian charges of hacking in 1995 (aged 23) but avoided jail on the condition he didn’t re-offend.
Under Assange, Wikileaks won a 2011 Walkley Award (broadly Australia’s equivalent to a Pulitzer Prize).
If Assange loses his appeal in the UK, his final forum would be the European Court of Human Rights.
Intrigue, in D.C.
You won’t want to miss this! Our co-founder Helen Zhang is hosting
our first DC-based event in 2024 on Wednesday, April 24th
, at 6:00 PM ET. Join us for an evening reception to meet the Intrigue team and hear from bestselling author and former spy Jack Beaumont. Register here.
Register here
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇵🇭
Philippines
: President Ferdinand Marcos Jr. has expressed outrage at an alleged “
secret agreement
” between China and his predecessor (Duterte) to “
compromise
”
Philippine rights in the South China Sea
.  Duterte’s daughter is now VP, but President Marcos Jr. declined to appoint her as the country’s sole caretaker during his US visit this week.
🇪🇺
EU
: Two Russian oligarchs have won
a surprise victory against EU sanctions
, with a court ruling there wasn’t enough evidence to show the pair had been involved in Russian efforts to undermine Ukraine. The EU had described the billionaires as being close to Putin and his circle.
🇻🇳
Vietnam
: A court has handed down a death sentence to Truong My Lan, the 67-year-old property developer responsible for one of the
biggest bank frauds in world history
. The court has also ordered her to repay $27B of the $44B she loaned from Saigon Commercial Bank.
🇨🇴
Colombia
: Prosecutors
will take former president Alvaro Uribe to trial
over claims he sought to bribe witnesses to discredit allegations that he had ties to right-wing paramilitaries. Uribe, who says the charges are political, had a ‘
tough on leftist guerrillas
’ image while in office.
🇸🇦
Saudi Arabia
: The kingdom is reportedly scaling down plans for
The Line
, its
futuristic, $1.5T megapolis
that was slated to stretch 170km across the desert as part of its ‘Neon’ project.
The Line
is now projected to span only ~2.4km by 2030, and house 300,000 people (not 1.5 million).
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Some recommendations from Team Intrigue if you’re spending the weekend in
🇲🇦
Marrakesh
Visit
: Tour the ‘
Ben Youssef Madrasa
’ (a UNESCO World Heritage site) for a pretty stunning taste of Moroccan architecture.
Eat
: Drop by the ‘
Cafe Des Epices
’ for a classic cup of mint tea.
Do
: If you’re determined to conquer Morocco’s legendary cuisine, why not book a
private cooking lesson
with a private chef?
PHOTO OF THE DAY
Credits: Liotta Marisa.
We always thought Gandalf was the only one with this level of smoke-blowing flex, but Italy’s Mount Etna just threw down with some pretty perfect smoke rings. The puffs are a rare phenomenon generated by the rapid release of water vapour within a circular vent. Italian social media users have nicknamed the volcano ‘
Lady of the Rings
’.
FRIDAY QUIZ
1) What's widely regarded as the first-ever hack?
The 1834 hacking of the French Telegraph System
The 1940 hacking of Nazi systems by the French resistance
The 1962 hack by an MIT student seeking more computer time
The 1979 hack of Digital Equipment Corporation by Kevin Mitnick
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) What are 'red hat' hackers?
Illegal hackers stealing information for personal gain
Ethical hackers working to find program vulnerabilities
Vigilante hackers going after cybercriminals
Hackers from communist states
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) Gary McKinnon, a Scottish hacker, is believed to have carried out the biggest military computer hack of all time. What was he reportedly looking for?
Evidence of UFOs
Evidence of anti-gravity technology
Evidence of 'free energy' technology
All of the above
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Was this forwarded to you? We're a team of ex-diplomats producing a concise and engaging geopolitical briefing for 85k+ leaders each day.
It’s free to subscribe
.