URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/blinken-goes-beijing
Title: 🌍 Blinken goes to Beijing

Today’s newsletter supported by:
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Yuuuuge few days on the world stage: a delegation of African leaders just wrapped a peace mission to Ukraine and Russia; America’s top diplomat has made a rare visit to Beijing; and India’s PM is about to hit the skies headed for the US. But fear not, dear Intriguer. We’ll translate every side-eye
😒
, eye-roll
🙄
, and stink-eye 😐, and keep you firmly in the loop.
Today’s briefing is a 4 min read:
🇨🇳
Blinken goes to
Beijing
🇮🇷
The
US
and
Iran
are still talking in secret.
➕
Plus:
The corporate space race, how the papers are covering Pakistan’s bailout bid, and
Barbie
somehow shocks the French.
PS
- be sure to share the Intrigue with your friends, frenemies and frolleagues using your unique referral link below (it’s working again
🙂
).
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇬🇪
Georgia
: Manganese miners in Georgia are a week-plus into a
strike over unexpected pay cuts
. The mining operator says war-related market disruptions have made it difficult to ship manganese, Georgia’s third-largest export, to overseas buyers.
🇭🇷
Croatia
: Officials are expecting Croatia’s recent accession to Europe’s free-travel Schengen Zone to drive a
record tourism season
this summer. The sector already accounts for more than 20% of Croatia’s economy.
🇹🇭
Thailand
: Southeast Asian foreign ministers will
meet in Thailand
today to prepare to “fully re-engage Myanmar at the leaders’ level,” according to the Thai foreign ministry. Myanmar was expelled from ASEAN, the regional bloc, after a coup in 2021.
🇵🇪
Peru
: Health Minister Rosa Gutiérrez stepped down late last week for her
handling of a dengue fever outbreak
that has infected nearly 150,000 people. President Dina Boluarte declared a state of emergency in response to the outbreak earlier this month.
🇿🇦
South Africa
: A delegation of African leaders led by South African President Cyril Ramaphosa
arrived in Kyiv
on Friday (16 June) amid a Russian missile barrage. The leaders met with Vladimir Putin in St. Petersburg the following day.
🇨🇳
China | Geopolitics
Blinken goes to Beijing
US Secretary of State Antony Blinken landed in Beijing yesterday (Sunday), marking the first visit to China by a top American diplomat since 2018.
That's a long time between visits for two competing major powers.
So it’s not surprising Blinken's meeting with his counterpart Qin Gang
ran for almost six hours
(before they kicked on for a working dinner afterwards).
Each side had a long (and growing) list of grievances to get through.
China
remains irritated by America’s:
💣 arms sales and other support for Taiwan
🙅‍♀️ continued tariffs on $300B in Chinese goods
👨‍💻
heavy restrictions on China’s access to advanced tech, and
🚢
regular military and intelligence activities along China’s coast.
For its part,
the US
remains concerned by China’s:
😨
continued intimidation of Taiwan
🛩️ dangerous manoeuvres in international waters and airspace
🤐
refusal to condemn Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, and
✊
human rights abuses in Xinjiang, Hong Kong, Tibet and elsewhere.
Both
China
and
the US
released statements after yesterday's marathon discussions. And by recent standards, both were pretty cordial.
Intrigue's take:
But the two sides are still so far apart, not just on the substance, but on
how to approach
the substance. The US wants “guardrails” to help manage the risk of US-China competition veering into conflict.
But China views “guardrails” as code for normalising the above US activities China doesn’t like. So for China’s part, the way to manage all this risk is for the US to back off, rather than pressure China into accepting “guardrails”.
None of this will get better without talking. But it may not get better
with
talking, either.
Also worth noting:
In
breaking news
, US officials have said Blinken will also meet China’s President Xi Jinping today (Monday) before departing China.
China’s foreign ministry spokesperson struck a
hopeful tone
about Blinken’s visit on Twitter.
📰
How newspapers covered…
Pakistan’s rapidly fading IMF bailout bid.
New York, US
IMF Blasts Pakistan Budget, Signaling Bailout May Not Happen
Mumbai, India
Pakistan needs to unlock IMF bailout to avoid default
Karachi, Pakistan
Dar* blames ‘geopolitics’ for stalled IMF loan
* Ishaq Dar is Pakistan’s Finance Minis­ter
Today’s newsletter is supported by: Holi
Credit Cards to Make Health and Wellness More Affordable.
With Holi, you can earn cashback, rewards & discounts on everything from mental health and fitness to personal care and productivity.
Here’s how it works:
You get cashback, savings, and points for various health & wellness services - from fitness classes to healthy food, spa visits to personal care products, and much more.
Then, you can use your points in two ways: 1) Redeem them for cash back or 2) Use them for premium products/services in our wellness marketplace.
Join the waitlist.
🇮🇷
Iran | Geopolitics
Iran and the US are talking low-key
The US has
reportedly
been conducting secret talks with Iran to restrict the country’s nuclear program and free detained US citizens.
The talks, aimed at a “political ceasefire”, are a last-ditch attempt at nuclear diplomacy
after formal negotiations collapsed last year.
If agreed, Iran will:
not
enrich uranium
beyond 60% purity (90% is weapons-grade)
not sell ballistic missiles
to Russia, and
return to cooperation
with the international nuclear watchdog.
In exchange
, the US is basically promising not to ramp up pressure on Iran any further.
Intrigue’s take:
This all effectively amounts to a nuclear pinky promise. So then what’s the big deal?
The US and Iran are still talking
, despite decades without formal ties, and after countless failed talks, and
Iran’s rapid nuclear development could still be halted
, after years of spooking its neighbours and the broader international community.
Also worth noting:
Oman has become a central mediator
in US-Iran indirect talks.
🎧 Today on
Intrigue Outloud
Credits: Johan Ordonez/AFP/Getty Images
How did a leading journalist end up in Guatemalan prison?
Find out here!
➕
Extra Intrigue
You know the drill. Mondays are for funny and odd news from around the world.
A Colombian police officer was brought to hospital after
ingesting a wad of cash he had extorted
from a businessman.
An American tourist in Australia stepped in to
fight a kangaroo
after it became aggressive.
A Polish bus operator announced it was
changing its bus route number
to the town of Hel from 666 to 669 after community backlash.
A manhunt was halted after Maltese authorities
realised the suspect was in prison
.
And the new PG-13
Barbie
film has accidentally ended up with
a very MA-15+ poster
in France.
🗳️ Poll time!
What's the best geopolitics-related TV show you've seen?
🇺🇸 The Diplomat (2023-)
🇫🇷 The Bureau (2015-2020)
🇺🇸 The West Wing (1999-2006)
🇩🇰 Borgen (2010-2022)
🇺🇸 Homeland (2011-2020)
🇮🇱 Fauda (2015-)
🇬🇧 Spooks (2002-2011)
🇫🇷 The Spy (2019)
🇮🇱 Tehran (2020-)
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
📊
Chart of the day
Credits: Chartr.
One small step for man, one giant leap for *
checks notes*
companies. A growing number of firms are venturing into commercial space flight, with the market headed towards a total value of $20.5B by the end of the decade.
Check out
our friends over at Chartr
for more sweet sweet charts and business insights!
Thursday’s poll:
What's the most important sector to near-shore?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🚜
Agriculture  (37%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️ 🛠️ Manufacturing  (26%)
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
💉
Pharmaceuticals (14%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️
🧑‍🔬
Knowledge & research (21%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!)  (2%)
Your two cents
:
🚜
E:
“If a country can't eat, it's kinda game over. Also there's the small issue of climate change that makes it important to control your food supply chain.”
✍️
L:
“Aerospace and ammunition.”
🧑‍🔬
K.M:
“Our economies can no longer be based on natural resource extraction - we need to move towards more knowledge-based and regenerative sectors.”