URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/blinken-goes-central-asia-trip
Title: 🌍 Blinken goes on a Central Asia trip

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Ah, the wonders of technology. Curing our ailments. Taking us to the stars. And also telling us
what each US President would look like with a mullet
. Leader of the free world in the front, late night tequila shots in the back.
Today’s edition is a 4.7 min read:
🇺🇸 The
US
sets its eyes on
Central Asia.
🇯🇵 What’s going on with
Japan
’s economy?
➕ Plus:
The history of Saudi oil, how the papers are covering an Israeli minister’s call to "erase" a Palestinian village, and (by popular demand) our Friday crosswords are back.
- Valentina, Ethan & Jeremy
🎧
Be sure to check out today’s
Intrigue Outloud
to go deeper on Mexico's EV boom, and US relations with Russia's neighbours in Central Asia
.
🗺️ AROUND THE WORLD
🇵🇰
Pakistan
: China has agreed to
loan Pakistan an additional $700M
to help its southern neighbour out of an economic tough spot. Pakistan is hoping the additional cash will help convince the IMF to agree to a bailout programme.
🇷🇴
Romania
: The EU member is set to become the world's first country to
employ an AI policymaker
. The AI, named Ion, will collect citizen feedback and synthesise it into reports for Romanian policymakers to read.
🇻🇳
Vietnam
: The National Assembly elected Vo Van Thuong as
Vietnam’s new president
after the abrupt resignation of his predecessor in January. The Vietnamese Communist Party has been purging its ranks following a corruption scandal.
🇭🇹
Haiti
: A high-level
Caribbean delegation flew to Haiti
earlier this week, unnerved by the country's spiralling gang violence since the president's assassination in 2021. As the crisis worsens, Haiti's neighbours are worried about spillover effects across the region.
🇪🇬
Egypt
: Cairo is
bringing daylight savings time back to Egypt
after a seven year break. The change is aimed at cutting domestic energy consumption, thus allowing Egypt to export more gas and earn some much-needed foreign currency.
🇺🇸 US | FOREIGN POLICY
I spy with my little US eye...
Blinken woos Central Asia amid Russia tensions
Briefly:
US Secretary of State Antony Blinken
wrapped up his short visit to Central Asia
on Wednesday (1 March) after meeting officials from all five Central Asian countries (Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, and Kyrgyzstan).
Blinken’s trip was aimed at further isolating Russia from its traditional partners in the region, who have pursued a careful neutrality in response to Russia's invasion of Ukraine. Of particular note were the repeated references (by both Blinken and his hosts) to US support for the region's
“sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity”
.
By invading Ukraine, Russia has made plain its determination to rebuild influence in its region, and to do so using ‘defending fellow Russians’ as an excuse.
Central Asia is home to plenty of ethnic Russians, and Russian nationalists have long called for their incorporation into the motherland, so one can understand the region's caution.
Intrigue’s take:
Central Asia rarely makes the global headlines, but we’ll be hearing more from this part of the world. In addition to the growing competition there between Russia, China and the US, the region is rich in key minerals needed for the green energy transition.
All in all, probably time to brush up on which 'stan is which.
Also worth noting:
While Moscow remains the traditional partner for Central Asian countries, China is also
lifting its game in the region
.
All five Central Asian countries are designated as ‘
not free
’ by democracy NGO
Freedom House
.
📰 GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES
How different newspapers covered:
Calls from Israeli Finance Minister Bezalel Smotrich to "erase" the Palestinian village of Huwara.
Links:
Anadolu Agency
,
Israel Times
,
Al Quds
.
Sponsored by
Highland Titles
If you’re looking for an internationally intriguing gift, check this out!
Lawmakers in Scotland legally recognised ‘souvenir’ plots of land in 1979. These gift-sized plots of land can be bought and sold with ease.
Highland Titles has been selling these plots since 2006, inviting customers to style themselves as Lord or Lady of their ‘estate’.
The land is managed as a nature reserve, and thousands of people find their plots yearly! Prices from less than $50.
Use the discount code INTRIGUE to get 20% off!
🇯🇵 JAPAN | ECONOMY
Japan’s manufacturers are seeing red.
Japan’s manufacturers keep spending despite grim outlook
Briefly:
Japan's manufacturing sector shrank again in February, according to an index from
S&P Global
. Both manufacturing output and new manufacturing orders have fallen for eight straight months, but February’s contraction was the steepest since July 2020.
Companies typically tighten their belts when times are tough. But Japan’s manufacturers
increased
investment by 1.1% last quarter, among the largest increases of any sector.
Japan’s low interest rates
make it easy for downtrodden firms to find capital (despite 41-year high inflation). So even though profits are declining, Japan’s manufacturers seem intent on spending while money is cheap.
Intrigue’s take:
Economist
William Buiter
said in 2010 that
“if [economics] were physics, gravity wouldn’t work in Japan.”
In other words: Japan’s economy may be weird, but with economists predicting growth there to hover around 2% this year, it might be working.
Step aside, Isaac Newton-san.
Also worth noting:
If you’re as confused about the Japanese economy as esteemed economist William Buiter is, check out
our friends at Lykeion
for an awesome explainer. Sign up
here
!
Across the Sea of Japan in China,
factory output is increasing
by its fastest rate since 2012.
📜 ON THIS DAY IN HISTORY
Dammam well no. 7, where Saudi Arabian oil was first struck. Credits: Aramco.
Saudi Arabia strikes gold...
… black gold, that is, on this day in 1938.
Eighty-five years later,
Saudi Arabia is the world’s largest oil exporter, with oil revenues accounting for 92% of the state budget. Scientists estimate that its state-owned oil giant, Aramco, has accounted for 4% of global greenhouse gas emissions since 1965.
While Riyadh has no plans to give up on oil,
it’s worked in recent years to diversify its economy to account for greener (energy) pastures ahead.
👀 EXTRA INTRIGUE
In honour of World Wildlife Day today, we've pulled together a crossword to test your knowledge of our planet's ecosystems. You can also play online
here
.
🗳️ POLL TIME!
Will cultivating friendly US ties land Central Asian countries in trouble with Russia?
⚔️ Yes, but the benefits are clearly worth the risk
❌ No, Russia's busy elsewhere
🖊️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday's poll:
Given the allegations of mismanagement, should Nigeria hold its elections again?
🟩🟩🟩🟩🟩🟩 🗳️ Yes, Nigeria’s democracy is at stake (71%)
🟨🟨⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 🚫 No, the people have spoken, it's time to move on  (29%)
Your two cents:
🚫
M.M:
"It's important for leaders to pursue peaceful means of resolving their differences and keep faith in institutions to deliver legitimate outcomes. Otherwise, why have democracy at all?"
🗳️
J.D:
"The elections should be held again but only after a thorough investigation is done as to what went wrong and measures to prevent it happening again."
Crossword answers:
Across - 3. Amazon 5. Turtle 7. England 9. Botswana 10. Yangtze
Down - 1. Java 2. Marine 4. Bhutan 6. Cheetah 8. Leopard