URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/can-erik-prince-save-haiti-75410bb57260222b
Title: 🌍 Can Erik Prince save Haiti?

Today’s briefing:
— Can Erik Prince save Haiti?
— A mysterious jet in Brazil
— Who moved that church!
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Diplomacy ranks as one of the world’s oldest professions. One of the (many) other contenders is private security and protection.
In ancient times, that included protection for the elites, or private armies hired to wage war on behalf of aggrieved/bored monarchs.
Today, it lives on in the mercenary profession. And it’s hard to think of a country where
mercenaries
are now more central to daily life than
Haiti
. That’s our top story today.
Number of the day
4
That’s how many consecutive days of decline the S&P500 has seen this week, amid a broader tech sell-off fuelled by concerns of AI overvaluation.
Mercenaries in charge
Haiti's situation has been tenuous for decades, but it somehow got worse after the 2021
assassination of President Moïse
— more than a million locals (aka ~10% of Haiti’s population) are now displaced, and gangs still control 90% of the capital!
You’ll recall the international community finally backed a
Kenya-led security mission
last year, but the understaffed and underfunded operation has made little progress, while gangs have killed at least two Kenyan cops.
Haiti’s transitional authority?
Still wracked by infighting and corruption allegations.
“Then send in the UN!”
, you might say. But not so fast. Two Security Council members (China and Russia) reject the idea, ostensibly out of concern for Haiti’s history of foreign interference, but inevitably also out of an interest in distracting the US via regional instability.
The UN chief himself is now ruling it out, too: the UN's last mission in Haiti caused one of the world's worst cholera outbreaks in modern history.
So that's where a
mysterious company called Vectus Global
enters the picture. Founded by infamous Blackwater billionaire
Erik Prince
, Vectus bills itself as a company “
typically hired when critical services or capabilities fail and need to be restored.
”
The group has been in Haiti since at least March, quietly deploying
drones
to help the country's beleaguered transitional administration. But in
a rare interview
, Prince has now revealed his mercenary group actually plans to…
a
) stay in Haiti for at least
10 years
, and
b
) help set up
a tax collection system
to finance Haiti's struggling institutions (and presumably pay Prince's fees).
His metric for success?
Prince says he’ll declare victory when anyone can “
drive from Port-au-Prince to Cap Haitian in a thin-skinned vehicle and not be stopped by gangs.
”
That's
ambitious
, even with hundreds of mercenaries joining him from the US, Europe and El Salvador.
Why?
First
, there's the
practicality
of wresting control back from gangs: just this week, for example, Vectus drones accidentally killed Haitian police instead of criminals.
Second
, there's the long-term
sustainability
of an operation that (even if successful) leaves Haiti’s key institutions dependent on a private company that’ll eventually leave.
Third
, there's the
legality
of all this: the precise arrangements between Vectus and Haiti's Transitional Council remain pretty opaque. And most tax revenue would be generated from goods entering via...
Fourth
, the
neighbours
: the other half of this beautiful island (the Dominican Republic) has long ago lost patience, with Santo Domingo’s popular president ditching his pleas for international help and instead pledging to deport 10,000 Haitians home a week.
So it’s a bumpy road ahead, but at this point, our world doesn’t seem to be offering Haiti any other options.
Intrigue’s Take
We've written previously about spooked governments burrowing deeper into the private sector to rebuild their own sense of security, but Haiti is an example of the opposite playing out: beleaguered governments
ceding
more
space
to the private sector in core public functions beyond security, and even into something as central as tax collection.
It's arguably all an example of how the very idea of
sovereignty is now evolving under pressure
. Whether authorities retreat from tax collection or charge into tech and mining, these evolutions all still share the same basic challenge of how you preserve the basics of public accountability. But then...
Third
, it's also an example of how sheer desperation today can be enough to normalise a move that would’ve seemed wild just years ago.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇪🇬
EGYPT
-
High alert.
Egypt reportedly now has 40,000 troops deployed along its border with Gaza and Israel, amid fears Israel’s renewed operation could displace Gazans over into Egypt. Meanwhile, Israel says it’s begun the first stage of its ground offensive back into Gaza City, with Netanyahu vowing the war won’t end until Hamas is defeated. (
MEE
)
Comment
:
For Egypt, it’s about avoiding both a) the destabilising effects of mass displacement, but also b) being seen to enable or legitimise that displacement.
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
Xi visits Tibet
.
President Xi Jinping has made a surprise visit to Tibet to mark 60 years since the consolidation of Beijing’s rule. His speech highlighted Tibet’s development and the need to maintain political stability “
against separatism
”. (
Independent
)
Comment:
This is only Xi Jinping’s second-ever visit to Tibet, and it comes amid renewed speculation around
the next Dalai Lama
, weeks after the incumbent celebrated his 90th birthday in exile. While the Communist Party wants control over the selection process, the Dalai Lama’s latest book set Beijing into panic by announcing his successor will be born in the “free world”.
🇪🇺
EU
-
No guarantees.
European partners are still discussing what the mooted EU-backed security guarantees for Ukraine could look like ahead of any future Zelensky-Putin meeting, though agreement is seemingly forming around
a
) a fully armed Ukraine,
b
) a multinational peacekeeping force, and
c
)
some
level of US involvement. (
Euractiv
)
Comment:
Until Europe’s re-armament takes hold, it’s that third pillar (US involvement) that would really make any security guarantees credible. But President Trump just reiterated his opposition to any US boots on the ground, and a top Pentagon official (Colby) is telling Europe that any US role will be minimal. Meanwhile, Russia is now insisting it will have to approve any security guarantees given to Ukraine, effectively undermining the whole endeavour.
🇰🇵
NORTH KOREA
-
You can’t sell those.
A US court has jailed a Chinese national for an elaborate US-based scheme selling weapons and ammo to North Korea in return for $2M in cash. He told US investigators the weapons (plus disguises he tried to buy) were for a surprise North Korean attack on the South. (
Euronews
)
Comment
:
It’s a little wild the North Koreans tried sourcing arms direct from the US, though Pyongyang might’ve calculated that America’s vast civilian firearms market presented opportunities that outweighed the risks of US counterintelligence.
🇺🇸
US
-
Add them to the list.
DC has formally added the Majeed Brigade (a suicide bombing faction of Baloch separatists in Pakistan) to its list of foreign terrorist organisations. (
Nikkei
)
Comment
:
Interestingly, it’s playing out not just as an overture to Pakistan, but also Pakistan’s backers in Beijing, who’ve long bristled at Baloch attacks on Chinese nationals and Belt and Road infrastructure
projects across Pakistan
.
🇳🇿
NEW ZEALAND
-
First spy conviction.
A court martial hearing has jailed a New Zealand soldier who tried to defect to an un-named foreign country. He was already under scrutiny for his right-extremist ties, and ended up passing sensitive materials to what he thought was the same foreign government (but was actually an undercover Kiwi operative). (
RNZ
)
🇩🇰
DENMARK
-
No tax on books.
The Danish government has announced it’ll remove a 25% tax on books (reportedly the highest in the world) to encourage more folks to read. (
Guardian
)
Extra Intrigue
Here’s what people around the world are googling
🇮🇹
Italian
music fans googled ‘
Maneskin reunion
’ as news broke the rock band is planning a
reunion tour
.
Folks in
🇧🇷
Brazil
wanted info on the mysterious ‘
avião americano no Brasil
’ (
American plane in Brazi
l), as speculation swirls around
an unmarked CIA ‘gatekeeper’ jet
that landed briefly in Porto Alegre before continuing its voyage.
And
🇮🇳
Indian
netizens searched for ‘
extreme rainfall alert
’ as Mumbai experienced
over 400mm of rain in 36 hours
.
From our sponsors
Want to Stand Out in Your Career? Learn a Language.
Whether you're expanding into new markets, working with global teams, or simply sharpening your skillset, speaking another language is a serious edge. Babbel was built to help people like you get results with practical conversations and useful phrases you’ll actually apply. With just 10 minutes a day, you’ll boost your brainpower and grow your confidence in the workplace.
Invest in Yourself – Save 55%
Feat of the day
@bjoernjaevel via Twitter/X.
Imagine waking up one morning, dropping your frosted strawberry PopTart in the toaster, then glancing outside while opening up the latest edition of Intrigue, only to realise the church that’s been sitting across the road for over a century is gone!
You start to question everything you thought you knew: am I dreaming? where am I? was the third season of The White Lotus
really
that bad? Then you open up Intrigue, and learn that Swedish authorities had to relocate the historic church opposite your home in the town of Kiruna because a nearby iron ore mine was posing a ground subsidence risk.
Turns out it took two whole days to shift the house of worship 5km (3mi) because the special trailer moved at 0.5 kph (0.3 mph), just
slightly
faster than a giant tortoise.
Then you kept reading to check out Intrigue’s latest poll.
Today’s poll
Beyond boots on the ground, what do you think the international community should do to help Haiti?
🚚 Send more aid
🤝 Facilitate political reconciliation
🔫 Crack down on illicit arms / cash
🚨 Train Haiti's security forces
✍️ Other
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Which screen medium do you think wields the most cultural clout?
🎥
Movies  (21%)
📺 TV series (37%)
🎮 Video games (5%)
📱
Vertical 'mini dramas'  (3%)
💻 YouTube (31%)
✍️ Other (write in!)  (2%)
Your two cents:
📺
M.C:
“Series is the key. Humans are hardwired to follow a story until the end.“
💻
J.M.W:
“Everyone under age 35 that I know only watches YouTube, so if it isn't the main medium now, it will be soon.”
🎥
J.W.A:
“Movies are easier to consume as they’re less of a ‘commitment’ to watch while still being gratifying.”
✍️
C.O:
“Social media is arguably (and algorithmically) the most intense screen based battle ground for both subtle and overt attempts to influence or manipulate.”