URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/china-isnt-ready-give-coal-power
Title: 🌍 China isn't ready to give up coal power

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Our word of the day is ‘shrinkflation’, which occurs when a product stays at the same price but shrinks in size. And on that note…
Today’s briefing is a 4.3 min read:
🇨🇳
China
just can’t quit coal.
💣
Global military spending
keeps growing.
➕
Plus:
Russia at the UN, how the papers are covering China disowning its own ambassador’s statements, and some intriguing facts about coal.
🎧
Today’s Intrigue Outloud:
Joe Biden’s foreign policy report card.
Listen here!
🗺️ AROUND THE WORLD
🇵🇰
Pakistan
: Two explosions rocked
a counterterrorism facility
on Monday, killing at least 15 people. Authorities haven’t said whether it was terrorism or an accident involving improperly stored munitions.
🇫🇷
France
: Paris is looking to
prevent the US takeover
of a French nuclear-submarine parts supplier, to avoid giving Washington access to sensitive French tech. Nuclear subs are a touchy subject for Paris after the US played a role in Australia’s axeing of a $90B French subs contract.
🇹🇭
Thailand
: Authorities have issued a
stay-at-home warning
as a record-breaking heatwave grips much of Southeast Asia. Thailand recently recorded its highest-ever temperature (45.5°C / 114°F).
🇺🇸
US
: President Joe Biden has
formally announced
he’s running for re-election in 2024.
Polls suggest
lukewarm support for another run, but most Democrats say they’d still support him as nominee.
🇸🇩
Sudan
: The warring factions in Sudan have
agreed to a 72-hour ceasefire
, allowing thousands of people to evacuate from conflict zones. Previous attempts to negotiate a truce have failed to stop the fighting that’s caused upwards of 400 deaths.
🇨🇳
CHINA | ENERGY
China’s coal habit is getting worse
Briefly:
Local governments in China reportedly
approved more coal power plants
last year than any time in the past seven years. Clocking in at around two new plant approvals per week, that’s more than the rest of the world combined.
In 2021, President Xi Jinping said China would “strictly limit” coal and eventually phase it out to reach net zero by 2060.
But this is proving difficult,
due to:
⚡ Huge power outages in 2021
💣 Energy security concerns sparked by the Russo-Ukraine War, and
📈
China’s current focus on boosting post-pandemic economic growth
Yet in this context (as in many others), China’s immediate and domestic decisions can have long-term and global impacts: China’s energy sector makes up 90% of its total emissions, which in turn make up nearly a third of total global emissions.
Intrigue’s take:
But things in China are rarely as clear as they seem. Sure, it’s gobbling up coal like Super Bowl fans hitting the chicken wings. And yet it’s also:
The
world’s largest
and fastest-growing producer of renewable energy
The world’s
largest clean energy investor
, and
Producer of half the world’s EVs plus
most of its solar panels
So this is probably less about Beijing hitting
ctrl-z
on its energy policy, and more about a) panicked local governments responding to recent energy fears, and b) China’s coal sector seizing its final opportunity to get new plants approved.
Still, the path to net zero runs through China. And that path now looks narrower.
Also worth noting:
Grid upgrades will be crucial to China’s energy transition: most of its energy resources are in the country’s west, yet most of its power consumption happens in its central and eastern provinces.
In 2022, China spent
$546B in green investments
, more than the EU ($180B) and US ($141B) combined.
📰
GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES
How different newspapers covered
: China distancing itself from remarks by its ambassador to France, who questioned the sovereignty of ex-USSR states.
Links
:
BBC
,
EUobserver
,
Eesti Päevaleht
.
Today’s briefing is sponsored by
Patent Drop
This Tool Predicts The Future of Tech by Analyzing 100+ Patents Each Week
The world of tech is constantly evolving. In order to remain players in the game, the movers and shakers of tech must be
ahead
of the trend, being ready at a moment’s notice to unleash new technologies to the masses.
Keeping up with these innovations has never been easier, thanks to
Patent Drop
. Delivered to your inbox 2x every week, Patent Drop reports on where Big Tech is securing Patents and what it means for the industry at large.
Want to know why Google’s AI development journey may be rocky?
Or how Apple is racing ahead to be the leader in VR?
Packed with expert analysis, Patent Drop will unlock answers into the future of Tech.
Join 24,000+ readers on the edge of innovation — sign up for free here.
🌍
WORLD | DEFENCE & SECURITY
Global military spending continues to rise
Briefly:
Global defence spending in 2022 increased for the eighth consecutive year to an all-time high of $2.24T, according to a
Sweden-based think tank
.
Here’s a snapshot of details that caught our eye:
🇯🇵
Japan’s defence spending hit 1.1% of GDP, its highest since 1960
🇸🇦
Saudi Arabia’s spending rose (by 16%) for the first time since 2018
🇪🇺
Spending in Central & Western Europe hit a new post-Cold War high
🇫🇮
NATO’s newest member (Finland) jacked its spending up 36%, and
🇺🇦
Ukraine’s 640% increase was the largest anywhere since 1949
The study attributes Japan’s spending growth to concerns about China and North Korea. And Saudi Arabia’s increase stems from its intervention in Yemen.
Intrigue’s take:
As for Europe’s boost in defence spending? Expenditure there was already rising before Russia invaded Ukraine. But when a nuclear power and permanent member of the UN Security Council invades one of your neighbours, it’s no surprise when you decide to double down on that accelerator.
Also worth noting:
China’s military spending grew for the 28th consecutive year, the longest uninterrupted run of any country. Its 4.2% rate of growth was China’s second slowest growth rate since 1995 (the slowest was in 2021).
The US expanded its military spending by 0.7% last year. It spent more than the next ten countries combined.
👀
EXTRA INTRIGUE
PS, here are those coal facts you didn’t ask for:
It takes about
1 million years
to form coal
Tinnunculite is a substance that’s only produced when a European falcon poops on a burning coal mine (we promise
it’s real
)
The world holds an estimated
1.07 trillion tonnes
of coal reserves
Coal is the world’s single largest source of electricity, and its
single largest source
of CO2 emissions
📸
PHOTO OF THE DAY
Lavrov (middle) glances towards UN chief António Guterres (left). Credits: The Australian.
Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov used Russia’s time as president of the UN Security Council (which rotates on a monthly basis) to hold a meeting on the “maintenance of international peace and security” on Monday. Not all members of the Council seemed impressed.
🗳️ POLL TIME!
Do you think China's carbon emissions will peak before 2030, as pledged by Xi?
👍 Yes, China has the will and the way to make it happen
👎 No, that's unrealistic
🖋️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
What do you think Ukraine's spring counter-offensive will gain?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🚜
Significant territorial gains (46%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️ 🗺️ Only small advances (38%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
❌
Nothing, the status quo will prevail (14%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 🖋️ Other (write in!)  (2%)
Your two cents:
🚜
S.W:
“Ukraine has repeatedly surprised the world with outsized results with inadequate arms compensated for by extreme ingenuity and skill as would be expected from a cornered tiger. ”
🖋️
T.P.G:
“While territorial gains and losses are important for morale and propaganda, this is unmistakably a war of attrition. […] a long-term intractable conflict looms unless global diplomacy efforts pull a rabbit out of their collective hat.”