URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/china-starts-work-fifth-antarctic-base
Title: 🌍 China starts work on a fifth Antarctic base

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Yuuuuge thanks to all our friends at
Morning Brew HQ
in Manhattan for
yesterday’s collab
with our co-founders Helen and John. We had a blast discussing how we go behind the headlines to create the newsletter you know and love every day! We’ll share the video with y’all soon.
And of course, a happy Eid al-Fitr to all folks celebrating.
Today’s briefing is a 3.9 min read:
🧊
China
is building a fifth research base in Antarctica.
🇭🇺
Why
Hungary
is banning Ukrainian goods.
➕
Plus:
Americans don’t want EVs, how the papers are covering the Brazilian security chief stepping down, and a capital-themed crossword to round out your week.
🎧
Today’s Intrigue Outloud:
Is Europe taking its security seriously?
Listen here!
🗺️ AROUND THE WORLD
🇵🇰
Pakistan
: Islamabad has placed its
first order for discounted Russian crude oil
. The deal offers new revenue for sanctioned Russia, and respite for Pakistan as it struggles through an economic crisis.
🇺🇦
Ukraine
: NATO Secretary-General Jens Stoltenberg flew to Kyiv yesterday (Thursday), his
first visit since the war began
. His show of support comes as Ukraine prepares for a Spring counteroffensive.
🇮🇳
India
: A court has
rejected an appeal by opposition leader Rahul Gandhi
against his defamation conviction, a significant setback in his goal of being reinstated to parliament. Gandhi was sentenced to two years in prison last month for a 2019 comment on the PM’s surname.
🇨🇺
Cuba
: Miguel Diaz-Canel has begun
a second five-year term
as president. Cuba’s first civilian leader post-Castro brothers, he’s pledged to address inflation, corruption and shortages on the island.
🇦🇪
UAE
: Italy has
lifted its arms sale embargo
against the UAE after assessing the country had decreased its military presence in the Yemeni civil war. The embargo was put in place in 2021.
🧊
CHINA | GEOPOLITICS
China’s back to work in Antarctica
Briefly:
China is building its
fifth research facility in the Antarctic
, resuming construction there after a five-year pause. The new base (on Inexpressible Island) is located far from China’s four other stations, maximising its footprint.
China’s not the only power
sprinkling research stations across the Antarctic like
Salt Bae seasoning a rump
. So why all the interest? Well first, it’s China. And second, the new site will include a satellite ground station.
This kind of ‘dual use’ facility can help do other things like collect intel. And it’ll be ideally placed to collect that intel from New Zealand and Australia, two nearby members of the Five Eyes intelligence network.
But world powers show an interest in Antarctica for other reasons, too:
📡
It’s one of the world’s clearest points for satellite transmissions
🚢
As the ice melts, new shipping (and mining) opportunities open up
🏆 And it’s a bit of a trophy for countries seeking ‘great power’ status
Plus of course, there’s plenty of
legit scientific research
happening down there too, including the project that helped discover the ozone hole in 1985.
Intrigue’s take:
Right now, the Antarctic Treaty prohibits any country from militarising the continent or exploiting its natural resources. The US has even
inspected
China’s site and found nothing of note (beyond a dead penguin!).
But the Treaty becomes modifiable in 2048, and nobody really knows what might happen. That uncertainty drives suspicion. And that suspicion drives manoeuvring.
Also worth noting:
China currently
operates two icebreakers
, with a third under construction. Russia operates
37 icebreakers
.
There are 82 stations in Antarctica run by 30 countries. Argentina has the most (13). The largest (the US
McMurdo Station
) can host 1,000 people.
📰
GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES
How different newspapers covered
: Brazil’s security chief handing in his resignation.
Links
:
The Guardian
,
El Pais
,
O Globo
.
Today’s briefing is sponsored by
Roca
We really like newsletters, and we've got another recco comin' in hot: The Current by RocaNews.
Here's what we like about it:
It was founded by people who don't like the negative, partisan, and alarmist style of news,
It favours facts over opinions,
It tells you what you need to know for the day (so you can hold your own at happy hour).
Sign up with one click!
🇭🇺
HUNGARY | GEOECONOMICS
Ukrainian grain is one of 25 goods that Hungary is banning
Some EU members are banning Ukrainian goods
Briefly:
Hungary has added honey and various meats to a list of Ukrainian products that can’t be imported until at least 30 June. The EU has criticised Hungary’s decision and similar measures from Poland, Slovakia, and Bulgaria.
The seeds of all this tension
were planted last year when a Russian blockade in the Black Sea led the EU to cut tariffs on Ukrainian grain, to help Ukraine’s economy. But a flood of cheap Ukrainian wheat has since left EU farmers uncompetitive (and angry).
In March,
the EU
allocated millions
to support farmers along its eastern flank, and on Wednesday, officials
suggested
topping up with another €100M.
Intrigue’s take:
Poland and Slovakia are some of
Ukraine’s biggest supporters
. But they’ve both got elections this year, and a poke in the EU’s eye can be great politics. As for Hungary, its prime minister is no fan of the EU
or
Ukraine
.
But whatever the motivation, this whole issue risks weakening European unity. And that’s good news for Russia; less so for Ukraine.
Also worth noting:
Russia warned last week that it may
stop participating in the Black Sea grain initiative
after the next deadline on 18 May, unless the West eliminates certain sanctions.
Check out today’s
Intrigue Outloud
to see how fractures among EU members risk undermining Ukraine’s war effort.
👀
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Intrigue co-founder Helen is back with a capital-themed crossword, below and
online
!
📊
CHART OF THE DAY
Data: Gallup.
The Biden Administration made waves last week by proposing
new environmental rules
designed to increase electric vehicle (EV) sales from 5.8% last year to almost 70% by 2032. Building that many EVs will be one challenge. Public opinion is shaping up to be another.
🗳️ QUIZ TIME!
Test your trade knowledge with our end-of-week quiz!
1) Which of the following countries buys the most US exports?
a) Canada
b) China
c) UK
d) Mexico
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) In 2021, trade between Russia and China amounted to around $116B. How much was it worth in 2022?
a) $150 B
b) $300 B
c) $190 B
d) $100 B
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) Which of the following countries was the world’s largest importer of cigarettes in 2021?
a) Myanmar
b) Spain
c) Indonesia
d) Japan
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Answers: 1-a, 2-c, 3-d.
Crossword answers:
Across: 1. Malta 3. Brunei 5. Tashkent 6. Mozambique 7. Nicosia 8. Moldova
Down: 2. Asmara 3. Bhutan 4. Reykjavik 6. Marshall