URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/china-vs-usa-who-s-got-the-cards-97c4436b19c44088
Title: 🌍 China vs USA: who's got the cards?

Today’s briefing:
— China and the US unveil a trade deal
— Space relic of the day
— Why you should avoid statues in the Philippines
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. There are weekends when nothing happens, then there’s this one, somehow featuring an India-Pakistan ceasefire, a US-China trade truce, US-Iran nuclear talks, a Hamas hostage release, and Putin
saying
he’s open to direct Ukraine peace talks, all before that Monday frosted blueberry Pop Tart even hit your plate.
Today’s briefing gets you up to speed on all of it, but leads with the
US-China trade truce
, so let’s dive in.
Number of the day
$4 billion
That’s how much cash the world’s largest EV battery-maker (China’s CATL) hopes to raise on the Hong Kong stock exchange, in what could be the world’s biggest listing this year.
A US-China trade truce
The top economic representatives of the US (Scott Bessent) and China (He Lifeng) just emerged from a weekend of talks at the Swiss ambassador’s UN residence on Lake Geneva, and
announced
they’ll lower tariffs and de-escalate their trade war.
The US will cut its tariffs from 145% to
30%
, while…
China will drop its 125% tariffs to
10%
.
In practice, this means trade between the world’s two biggest economies is once again viable, though this is just
a 90-day pause
while they find a more permanent solution.
In the meantime, both sides are still claiming this weekend’s talks were the result of
the other
’s desperation, so as talks continue, it’s worth exploring:
who has the cards here?
That depends on three questions:
Who can find substitute goods?
Friday saw
zero
US-bound ships depart China for the first time in recent history (excluding Covid), while China’s manufacturing activity has started to contract. Meanwhile, US ports like LA just saw arrivals drop by a third last week, and US trucking stocks have plunged.
All that to say… this trade war is moving from the front pages onto our world’s shelves. But
can’t we just buy from elsewhere?
Sure, the US can get cheap jeans and flatscreens from (say) Bangladesh or Mexico, while China is already getting more soy from Brazil.
The challenge, however, is
when there’s no substitute
: for the US, despite years of diversification efforts, it still relies on China’s rare earths, solar panels, and batteries, while China still needs the US for advanced chips, pharma, and key industrial chemicals.
So, who's got the cards?
Both Beijing and DC.
Who can find substitute
markets
?
China is way
more dependent on selling stuff to the US
than vice versa:
China exports
triple
to the US what the US sells to China, and
China's exports to the US alone are ~2.8% of China's GDP (it's <0.5% for the US)
So, US leaders have cited these figures as
evidence why China needs the US more
.
But as this trade war moves into boardrooms, China’s firms have already started selling
a)
to the US via third countries,
b)
to other markets, and
c)
back home at steep discounts (though there are costs and challenges with each).
It’s
a little trickier for the US
, with its China export base more concentrated on soy, oil, jets, and chips. China is the world’s single-largest buyer across each of those categories, and there’s just nobody else out there willing or able to buy that much US soy or Boeings.
So, who's got the cards?
Both Beijing and DC
And… who can withstand the politics?
As the head of China’s Communist Party, Xi can silence local reporting on the economic fallout, and quash any related unrest, while his state outlets continue to talk tough.
As for Trump, he’ll face the democratic rigours of a free press, opinion polls, and next year's mid-terms. And that might shape his negotiation timeline or willingness to shift.
So, who's got the cards?
As an unelected authoritarian, Xi might just have an edge.
Anyway, they both have some cards, which might be why they’ve both just de-escalated.
Intrigue’s Take
America’s big bet
was that, by integrating China into the global economy, the US model would win by nudging China to liberalise both its economy and its politics. But Xi has now shown an ability to do the opposite, jujitsu-ing markets to serve his own political strategy.
But
timing is everything
. History might show that Xi moved too early when he abandoned Deng's 'hide and bide' approach to reveal a more assertive China abroad. And history might show the US has now moved a little late in response.
Meanwhile, the
US might've also mis-timed its strategy
: it makes sense to gather trading partners, then jointly approach China with more leverage. But that happened already — it was called the Trans-Pacific Partnership and would've had the US at the helm of a deal covering 40% of global trade. But by the time that deal landed, US public opinion on trade had cratered, and both 2016 candidates disavowed it.
Even if a future administration wants to revisit that kind of strategy,
2025 isn't 2016
: China is now the top trade partner for more countries than the US by ~two-to-one, and those capitals will now be more reluctant to jeopardise their China ties.
Still, with this de-escalation, both Xi and Trump now have space to plan their next move.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
The Dispatch
For The Silent Majority of Self-Directed Thinkers
Tired of partisan media cheerleading for one team? Start a better news habit and join
The Dispatch
.
Jonah Goldberg and Steve Hayes launched
The Dispatch
in 2019 to build an enduring presence on the center-right for original reporting and thoughtful analysis. No insulting clickbait, no false outrage, no annoying auto-play videos—just reliable journalism that prioritizes context, depth, and understanding.
Join half a million loyal readers and start reading The Dispatch today.
International Intrigue readers: Claim your exclusive 30-day, all-access FREE trial today.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇺🇦
UKRAINE - Zelensky and Putin to have in-person talks?
Ukraine’s Volodomyr Zelensky has said he’ll “
wait for Putin on Thursday in Turkey
”, after the Russian leader dangled the possibility of direct talks in Turkey to (again) side-line a Trump-proposed immediate 30-day ceasefire. (
BBC
)
Comment:
While hosting European leaders in Kyiv, Zelensky has really put Putin in a bind here: if Putin agrees to a ceasefire, he has to explain what his million casualties were for. If he again refuses, the world gets more clarity that maybe Ukraine’s self-defence wasn’t the problem, after all.
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES - Hamas to release last living US hostage.
Ahead of President Trump’s visit to the Middle East from tomorrow (Tuesday), Hamas has agreed to release Edan Alexander, a dual US-Israeli citizen, as part of what it’s describing as efforts to “
reach a final agreement to end the war
”. (
NBC
)
🇵🇱
POLAND - Warsaw says Moscow behind mall fire.
PM Donald Tusk has announced he has definitive evidence that the 2024 burning of a Warsaw shopping centre
“was the result of arson ordered by Russian services”.
Neighbouring Lithuania recently accused Moscow of attempting a similar attack in an Ikea store.
(
CNN
)
Comment:
Europe has long accused Russia of waging a hybrid war to impose costs on the West’s support for Ukraine’s self-defence. The risk of that hybrid strategy is that, at some point, it might just jolt Europe awake instead.
🇮🇳
INDIA
-
Wobbly ceasefire with Pakistan holds.
There’ve been mutual accusations of breaches since the US announced an India-Pakistan ceasefire on Saturday evening, but hostilities have now halted. (
Guardian
)
Comment
: The two sides are both claiming victory but the truce doesn’t appear to address the underlying drivers, like India wanting an end to cross-border terrorism — and meanwhile, the real winner here might be China, whose J-10C jet downed some of India’s French-made Rafales. Stocks in the J-10C’s maker have soared.
🇦🇱
ALBANIA
-
Uncertainty over election results.
In a puzzling move, Albanian outlets have yet to publish any exit polls from Sunday’s critical election, with artist Edi Rama seeking an unprecedented fourth term, and pledging to bring Albania into the EU within five years. (
Politico
)
🇮🇷
IRAN
-
The
US and Iran agree! (to more talks)
Wrapping their latest nuclear talks in Rome, the two sides are still far apart (Iran wants a nuclear program, the US says no), but they’re still talking. (
France24
)
Comment
: Trump’s two-month ‘deal or war’ deadline for Iran expired last week, but his impending visit to Iran’s rivals in the region is a way to maintain pressure.
🇵🇦
PANAMA
-
Former president gets asylum in Colombia.
After more than a year living in Nicaragua’s embassy in Panama City, Panama’s ex-president Ricardo Martinelli is now over the border in Colombia, which has granted him asylum. He argues his money laundering conviction is political. (
AP
)
Comment
: These asylum deals often work along ideological lines, but we now have left-leaning Colombia helping right-leaning Martinelli. Colombia’s Petro probably wanted to bolster his regional credentials, help fellow leftist Nicaragua out of a bind, and help neighbouring Panama move on from Martinelli’s destabilising presence.
🇦🇫
AFGHANISTAN
-
Taliban bans chess.
The ruling group’s new chess ban claims the game could lead to gambling. (
BBC
)
Extra Intrigue
🤣
Your weekly roundup of the world’s lighter news
A local has managed to gain entry to the Japan 2025 Expo using an
85-year-old ticket
to Japan’s postponed 1940 expo.
A Swiss woman is in court after
repeatedly feeding her neighbour’s cat
, which eventually just stopped returning home.
A British broadsheet has had to hit ctrl-z after publishing a
headline claiming China had invaded Taiwan
(turns out it was just a hypothetical piece).
A tourist in the Philippines has been bitten by a crocodile after mistaking it for
a statue
.
And speaking of innocent but dangerous mistakes,
Nicolas Cage is claiming he’s regularly mistaken
for Nick Cave.
Space relic of the day
The Soviet Venera 8, which looks similar to the Kosmos 482 in question. Credits: NASA.
They say aim for the stars and you might hit the moon. So the Soviets aimed for Venus in 1972, but a malfunction meant their Kosmos 482 satellite never made it out of Earth’s orbit. That’s where it remained stuck until this Saturday morning, when it crashed back into the Indian Ocean (west of Indonesia), a half century later.
Today’s poll
Who do you think holds *more* cards?
🇨🇳 China
🇺🇸 The US
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Thursday’s poll:
Which long-term trend makes you optimistic for our future?
🩺
Medical breakthroughs (23%)
🌳
Renewable energy growth (30%)
💻 Technological advancements (21%)
💸
Declining global poverty (10%)
✏️ Improving global literacy (10%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (5%)
Your two cents:
✍️
N.J:
“Over 75 years without a nuclear war!”
💻
M.D.F:
“General tech advancements will accelerate medical breakthroughs and renewable energy as well, while helping to lift more people out of poverty.”
🩺
R.B:
“Medical advancements in cancer treatment and even just hip replacement has made it possible to live a longer and more enjoyable life.”
✏️
J.E:
“With literacy comes innovation.”
✍️
E.K.H:
“My own increasing involvement in politics. I'm tired of watching other people tear everything apart, now I'm starting to see a future where I can help rebuild it.”