URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/china-taliban-deepen-security-ties
Title: 🌍 China and Taliban to deepen ties

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Kosovo is home to quite a few young lads rocking the name ‘Tonibler’. That’s because after NATO airstrikes in 1999, many locals hailed the British PM (Tony Blair) a hero, and decided to name their newborns after him. Thus ‘
Tonibler
’ was born. Dozens of them, in fact.
Today’s briefing is a 3.9 min read:
🚃
The Taliban looks to China for
development
.
💰 Binance under scrutiny over sanctions evasion.
➕
Plus:
An ambassador tells us why peace is hard to build, how the papers are covering Colombia cancelling US deportation flights, and did China help Vancouver’s mayor win an election?
🗺️ AROUND THE WORLD
🇨🇳
China
: A
mysterious Chinese spacecraft
has returned to Earth after 276 days in orbit on a classified mission. Some
suspect
the reusable craft may have used advanced sensing and imaging equipment to collect intel.
🇪🇺
EU
: Armenia and Azerbaijan are due to
restart peace talks in Brussels
this weekend after a spike in tensions. A 2020 war over a disputed territory resulted in the deaths of thousands of Armenian and Azerbaijani soldiers.
🇳🇿
New Zealand
: Kiwi military spending is
set to increase by nearly $500M in the next four years
as the country attempts to limit its personnel loss and upgrade its security infrastructure. It’s New Zealand’s biggest military budget increase in years.
🇨🇱
Chile
:
Right-leaning parties have won the most seats
on Chile’s newly elected constitutional rewriting committee. The new draft constitution will likely be more conservative than the document defeated by a referendum last year.
🇸🇾
Syria
:
The Arab League
has readmitted Syria to the regional body after more than a decade. The League suspended Syria’s membership after President Al-Assad’s bloody crackdown on street protests in 2011.
🚃
AFGHANISTAN | GEO-ECONOMICS
The Taliban might have a new friend (China)
Briefly:
The foreign ministers of Afghanistan, China, and Pakistan
met in Islamabad
over the weekend and agreed to consider Afghanistan as a hub for China’s massive infrastructure spending in the region.
Kabul needs any investment it can get. Since the Taliban took over in 2021:
📉
GDP has
halved
to $10B (that’s less than McKinsey’s revenue), and
😓
two thirds
of Afghanistan’s 40 million folks can’t afford food (up from half).
With the Taliban now back in charge, the West continues to pick up checks for humanitarian agencies, but has mostly refused to work with the government.
Why?
The Taliban has banned women from universities, NGO jobs and even parks. And it’s conducted targeted killings of ethnic Hazaras and former soldiers.
So in search of new friends, the Taliban is turning to China
. And unlike the West, China doesn’t usually draw a link between aid and human rights.
Intrigue’s take:
Of course, that doesn’t mean China’s help comes strings-free. China wants the Taliban to:
stop militant groups from using Afghanistan to mount attacks back home (sound familiar?), and
bring the country’s security situation under control so Chinese firms can develop Afghanistan’s
massive mineral deposits
.
So far, US pressure, UN condemnation, and even
Russian finger-wagging
have done little to stabilise Taliban-led Afghanistan. Maybe Chinese railroads will do the trick…?
Also worth noting:
In December, Islamic State militants
bombed a hotel in Kabul
that frequently hosts Chinese diplomats and business leaders.
China and Afghanistan share a 92-kilometre-long (57 mi) border.
The US was the largest donor to Afghanistan’s U.N. appeal last year, giving nearly $1.2B. The US froze $7B in Afghan assets in 2021, assigning half for the families of the September 2001 terrorist attacks and moving the rest to
a Swiss-based fund
it says will benefit Afghans.
📰
GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES
How different newspapers covered
: Colombia cancelling inbound US deportation flights, due to alleged mistreatment of Colombian migrants.
Links
:
Anadolu Agency
,
China Daily
,
El Tiempo
.
Today’s briefing is sponsored by
Hubspot
Let’s, as a group, stop fumbling basic communications.
If you can articulate your thoughts and emotions with clarity, that’s powerful stuff… and the main reason why HubSpot made this crisp business communication guide. It’ll help you speak with power and poise in the workplace, which wins brownie points with your peers.
Go get ‘em, champ.
Download it here.
💰
TECH | CRYPTOCURRENCY
The world’s biggest cryptocurrency exchange has caught regulators’ attention.
Crypto-controversy mounts
Briefly:
Binance, the world’s largest cryptocurrency exchange, halted its Bitcoin withdrawals twice on Sunday due to a “congestion issue”. The
company’s actions
spooked a crypto sector that’s been hit by a wave of bankruptcies and scandals in recent months.
Binance is a big deal in the trillion-dollar crypto space
. In 2022, it:
controlled 92% of the world’s bitcoin spot trading volumes
hosted crypto trades worth around $65B a
day,
and
grew to 128 million users.
But the firm is also shrouded in secrecy.
As a private company, Binance hasn’t shared basic financial info (eg, revenue) with external investors since 2018.
Intrigue’s take:
This intriguing mix of money and secrecy has had regulators hovering around Binance like Canadians around a
bowl of poutine
. The firm is now in the crosshairs of at least
four different US agencies
(plus others abroad), including on allegations it allowed Russians to circumvent US sanctions.
Also worth noting:
Binance says it has a
700-member compliance team
handling 1,300 law enforcement requests a week.
The surprise collapse of crypto exchange FTX last year caused the entire sector’s market valuation to
fall below $1T
.
👀
EXTRA INTRIGUE
We’re very online, so you don’t have to be.
Did China help Vancouver’s mayor win election?
How Biden lost the Balkans
A caste survey could upend India
($)
Turkey’s earthquake election
Aid agencies are changing the way they do business
($)
💬
QUOTE OF THE DAY
US Ambassador Rick Barton has been working on global conflict mediation for decades - in Rwanda, Bosnia, Haiti, and elsewhere. So, why is peace getting harder to build? Check out Friday’s Intrigue Outloud on
Apple Podcasts
,
Spotify
, or
wherever
.
🗳️ POLL TIME!
If you had $1M to invest in a country, which one would you choose and why?
🇺🇸 US
🇮🇳 India
🇨🇳 China
🇩🇪 Germany
🇳🇬 Nigeria
🇧🇷 Brazil
🇮🇩 Indonesia
🇲🇽 Mexico
🇰🇪 Kenya
🖊️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll: Do you think the US will default on its debt this year?
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️
💸
Yes, and people aren't taking it seriously (34%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
❌
No, lawmakers will come to their senses (63%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 🖋️ Other (write in!)  (4%)
Your two cents:
❌
T.J.L:
“They play this game with the debt ceiling quite often. Duelling into the final hours trying to squeeze all manner of unrelated legislation through.”