URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/china-s-project-of-the-century-775d4dd840245b04
Title: 🌍 China’s project of the century

Today’s briefing:
— China’s project of the century
— Why your groceries are getting pricey
— Diplomat of the day
Presented by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. History is so often shaped by Murphy’s Law. Of
all the alleys
where Archduke Franz Ferdinand’s driver could’ve stopped, it had to be in front of Gavrilo Princip, whose pistol then triggered WWI and the collapse of four empires.
But if you’re lucky, you occasionally get glorious glimpses of the opposite — call it Yhprum's Law, Finagle’s Law of Serendipity, or whatever.
One
tiny
example: I was serving abroad ahead of a big leader summit, and got an urgent call from HQ saying our leader wanted to speak first on the agenda, and I
had
to make it happen. Panic set in:
every
leader wants that sweet sweet opening spot, and the summit was just days away! Impossible. But
seconds
after hanging up, I got a call from the exact foreign government hosting the summit, asking if my leader might like to speak first.
I confirmed that, ummm, yes, that should be fine. HQ thought I was some kind of wizard.
Anyway, today’s briefing explores
China’s
project of the century
, and it’s a cracker.
Number of the day
230,000
That’s how many pages on MLK’s assassination the Trump administration just released, unsealing (against some family wishes) a file that’s been locked since 1977.
Let’s dive right in
China just broke ground on what it’s calling the
“project of the century”:
a $167B hydropower mega-dam in Tibet (aka China’s ‘Xizang Autonomous Region’).
This big Motuo dam aims to:
Generate ~300TWh per year (
more than the UK
’s entire consumption)
Push China closer to its
2060
net zero goal, and
Jolt its
economy
awake with another massive infrastructure project.
And ‘
jolt
’ it did. In the hours since China’s premier (Li Qiang) confirmed the news…
Shares in the lead contractor (
China Energy Engineering
) surged 51%
Both
Power China
and
Huaxin Cement
were up 10% (Shanghai’s daily limit), and
Ore, steel, and rolled coil futures all soared.
Of course, this project is hardly a surprise for Intriguers: we flagged when the dam got its approvals back in December. But Saturday’s soil-turning ceremony with Premier Li is what caught everyone by surprise here:
they’re really doing this
.
And beyond the dam’s remarkable scale above, it’s turning heads for two big reasons:
Tibetan autonomy
The Dalai Lama doesn’t seek Tibetan independence, but rather what he calls a ‘
Middle Way Approach
’: genuine cultural, religious, and administrative autonomy within China.
So you can see how Beijing building the world’s largest dam in Tibet might be a tad
inflammatory
. We don’t have to speculate, either: China’s
much
smaller plan straddling Sichuan province met rare Tibetan protests in February last year because it involves:
Submerging a valley home to
ancient monasteries
, and
Relocating several villages home to
thousands of people
.
As for this new Motuo dam? It’s 30 times bigger. It’s even three times bigger than China’s famous 1990s-era
Three Gorges Dam
! And
that
one stirred ultra-rare dissent in China’s rubber-stamp legislature as authorities involuntarily resettled 1M+ people.
So while details on this new Motuo dam are still scarce, its sheer scale makes some kind of repeat seem inevitable: it’ll plonk a reservoir on the Yarlung Tsangpo River and bore tunnels through Namcha Barwa mountain, both reportedly sacred for Tibetans.
As for how China’s ruling party might handle any unrest? The past examples above have seen mass detentions and beatings. And the world will already be watching, because…
The neighbours are worried
If there’s one thing we remember from geography class, it’s that rivers flow. And yes, the Yarlung Tsangpo flows into both
India
(where it’s called the Brahmaputra) and
Bangladesh
(where it’s called the Jamuna), watering perhaps
400 million lives and livelihoods
via agriculture, fisheries, sanitation, and transportation.
That kind of
leverage
means both neighbours have already flagged concerns China could weaponise these water flows. And it’d hardly be a first: right after India suspended its own water treaty with Pakistan during their May spat, China started fast-tracking a dam in Pakistan to help loosen India’s grip.
But for now, Beijing is dismissing any concerns, arguing it doesn’t want to benefit at the “
expense of its neighbours
” —
though various neighbours like Bhutan, Nepal, and the South China Sea claimants (plus China’s own annexed territories) might like a quiet word.
Intrigue’s Take
This is a water story as much as it’s a China story:
On the
water
side, the list of related disputes just keeps getting longer:
North
Korea
just unleashed a dam on the South without a heads-up
Scarcity is (again) straining US-
Mexico
ties despite their 1944 treaty
Egypt is still peeved at
Ethiopia
’s dam on the Blue Nile
Euphrates flows are still complicating
Iraq
-
Iran
ties, and
Years of drought displaced 1-2 million rural Syrians into urban centres, in turn contributing to
Syria
’s civil war and triggering migration that’s reshaping Europe.
But while we often focus on the diplomatic solutions, there’s increasingly a
technological
one, too: advances around ultra-cheap solar and desalination are getting to a point where water scarcity might be more a policy choice than any status quo we must accept.
As for the
China
angle, here’s another way you might think about all this: it’s arguable this latest mega-project is yet another example of the teleological tension at the heart of the ruling Communist Party — it’s not about any Marxist class vision, but more an endless pursuit of development as a way to justify its own endless rule. Build or die, right?
Sound even smarter:
This new Motuo dam is due for completion in the 2030s.
In collaboration with
Mindstream
Join over 200,000 smart readers who start their day with Mindstream's free AI newsletter. In just a few minutes each morning, you'll get
essential artificial intelligence news
, actionable insights, and
practical tips that help you use AI
more effectively. Mindstream filters through the overwhelming amount of AI content online to deliver only what's truly important and relevant to your professional and personal growth.
Don't get left behind
in the AI revolution—level up your knowledge daily with trusted insights that busy professionals rely on to stay competitive and informed.
Subscribe today.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇺🇦
UKRAINE - Talk it out.
Officials from Russia and Ukraine will meet in Turkey tomorrow (Wednesday) for another round of peace talks. The previous two rounds led to several prisoner exchanges but no progress on a negotiated end to the war. (
BBC
)
Comment:
President Trump’s 50-day deadline on Russia is still a while off (2 September), but we’ve not yet seen any indication of a change in Putin’s approach. Whenever this war ends, he then has to justify the cost — an impossible task without a major win.
🇬🇷
GREECE
-
Let’s end this.
The Greek foreign minister has joined 27 other Western envoys in a joint statement condemning the suffering in Gaza and Israel’s aid delivery, reiterating calls for Hamas to release the hostages, and urging an end to the conflict. The US ambassador to Israel (Huckabee) has rejected the statement as putting pressure on Israel instead of Hamas. (
Joint statement
)
🇹🇼
TAIWAN
-
You’re on your own, kid.
Tokyo is reportedly warning Japanese firms in Taiwan they’ll be “
on their own
” for evacuation in the event China seeks to invade. (
FT
$)
Comment
: These warnings have been circulating for years, potentially contributing to last year’s 27% drop in local Japanese FDI. It’s all a reminder of the tension between governments seeking to educate their own citizens about forward risks, versus the risk of this just translating into more economic pressure on Taiwan.
🇫🇷
FRANCE
-
Investigate this.
Billionaire Elon Musk has declined to cooperate with a French preliminary criminal probe into whether his X platform might’ve been "
manipulating its algorithm for 'foreign interference' purposes
". Musk argues the investigation is politically motivated and will threaten free speech. (
France24
)
🇧🇩
BANGLADESH
-
Jet crashes into school.
Dhaka is holding a day of national mourning today (Tuesday) after a Bangladeshi air force jet crashed into a school, leaving at least 27 dead. (
Al Jazeera
)
🇪🇨
ECUADOR
-
You’re outta here.
Quito has extradited drug lord Adolfo Macías Villama (aka Fito) to face charges in the US. Authorities recaptured him last month after over a year on the run. (
El País
)
🇳🇪
NIGER
-
Galactic headache.
Remember we told you about that sweet sweet opportunity to jazz up your desk with a
$4M asteroid paperweight
? Well, it turns out Niger (where the Mars rock was first found) is now investigating the sale, citing fears of "
illicit international trafficking
." (
AfricaNews
)
Extra Intrigue
Intrigue’s commodities corner is back
Oil
:
Prices dipped
on Monday after it became clear the EU’s 18th sanctions package on Russia is unlikely to meaningfully impact supply.
Rare earth
: China’s
rare earths exports to the US increased 660%
in June from May reflecting their 90-day truce, though volumes are still below what China was exporting before imposing partial bans in April.
Food
: Extreme weather events are
making groceries more expensive
around the globe, according to a study involving the Barcelona Supercomputing Center.
From our sponsors
A Private Circle for High-Net-Worth Peers
Long Angle
is a private, vetted community for HNW entrepreneurs and executives ($5M-$100M net worth). No membership fees.
Connect with self-made peers in confidential discussions and live meetups.
With $100M+ invested annually, secure preferential terms unavailable to individual investors.
Apply to Join
Diplomat of the day
Courtesy of @AmbJapanUK on X
Ambassadors often keep a low profile on social media, beyond the occasional HQ-approved handshake or milquetoast ministerial press release. Anything more could get you a slap on the wrist at home or unwanted media attention abroad.
That might be why
Japan’s ambassador to the UK
, Hiroshi Suzuki, is generating such a buzz right now. In fact, he’s turned several Intrigue team-members into full-blown fangirls.
Whether he’s crushing a Guinness, visiting the Titanic museum, or belting out the Welsh anthem, the ambassador always has his Paddington bear in hand, and a smile on his dial.
An Exeter associate professor (David Blagden) made us chuckle with this wry observation: “
Who knew that going to a place and publicly extolling its virtues - with seemingly genuine enthusiasm - would make its inhabitants feel positive towards you and your country?!
”
Today’s poll
What do you think should take priority in the Motuo dam project?
⚡ China's energy transition
👥 Local Tibetan wishes
🌊 The concerns of neighbours
✍️ Other (write us!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you own any cryptocurrencies?
💰 Yes, here's why... (19%)
🙅
No, here's why... (81%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (1%)
Your two cents:
🙅
R.K:
“If I don't understand how it works I won't invest or buy it, regardless of what it is.”
💰
I.B:
“I'm still looking forward to ‘
decentralized currency
’ actually being used as such. Until then, it's going well as an investment.”
💰
M.W:
“It’s pretty easy to buy into bitcoin ETFs.”
🙅
K.R:
“Nope it’s not fungible. Bad actors can, will, and are having a field day. In an era of deregulation and waning supervision, the risks are too high.”
✍️
J.M.B:
“Bitcoin and only bitcoin.”