URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/chinaus-tensions-loom-shangrila-dialogue
Title: 🌍 China-US tensions loom over Shangri-La Dialogue

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Do you need a pick-me-up this fine Monday?
Here
’s a picture of Albert Einstein wearing a pair of fluffy slippers.
Today’s briefing is a 4.6 min read:
🌏
US-China tensions
loom over Asia-Pacific security summit.
⛏️
Congo
overtakes
Peru
as the world’s 2nd largest copper exporter.
➕
Plus:
A flag with a Kalashnikov, how the papers are covering Saudi Arabia possibly joining BRICS, and how a Canadian won a famous race despite being knocked out cold.
🎧
Today’s Intrigue:
Australia’s PM has a message for the world.
Listen here!
🗺️ AROUND THE WORLD
🇰🇬
Kyrgyzstan
: Prosecutors are moving to strip a top Kyrgyz opposition lawmaker of the
criminal immunity
afforded to members of parliament. He stands accused of fomenting riots and plotting a coup, charges he denies.
🇳🇴
Norway
: The US will open its first diplomatic mission
north of the Arctic Circle
, in the Norwegian city of Tromsoe. NATO will also conduct Arctic military exercises in nearby Finland this week.
🇮🇩
Indonesia
: Malaysia will join Indonesia in
suspending trade talks
with the EU over European deforestation regulations that would harm the countries’ lucrative palm oil industry. Indonesia and Malaysia account for 83% of the world’s palm oil production.
🇹🇹
Trinidad & Tobago
: Trinidad has asked the US to amend the terms of an
oil exploration licence
involving Trinidad and neighbouring Venezuela. As written, the licence would prohibit cash payments to Venezuela’s state-owned oil company, which remains under US sanctions.
🇸🇳
Senegal
: At least nine people have been killed after police
clashed with supporters
of opposition leader Ousmane Sonko, who was sentenced to two years in prison for ‘corrupting youth’. Senegalese authorities banned social media on Friday (2 June) in response.
🌏
ASIA-PACIFIC | DEFENCE & SECURITY
US Secretary of Defence Lloyd Austin (L) and China’s Defence Minister Li Shangfu (R)
were among the 600 delegates attending this weekend’s Shangri-La Dialogue
China-US rivalry looms large at top Asia summit
Briefly:
The annual three day
Shangri-La Dialogue
wrapped up yesterday (Sunday), after bringing together 600 defence and security delegates from 49 countries at the sprawling Shangri-La Hotel in Singapore.
Each year the summit generates seemingly endless headlines, particularly around US-China competition. And this year was no exception. Highlights included:
🇦🇺
Australia's
PM
urged
China to re-open dialogue with the US
🇺🇸
The US
defence secretary
rebuked
China for not resuming military talks with the US
🇨🇳
China’s
defence minister
called
on the US to decease military deployments near China
🇵🇭
A
Philippines
coast guard rep
said
there was a disconnect between China’s pro-dialogue words and its actions in the South China Sea
🇩🇪
Germany’s
defence minister
announced
Germany will send two warships to the Indo-Pacific in 2024 to help maintain regional security
🇮🇩
Indonesia’s
defence minister
revealed
a Russo-Ukraine peace plan focused on demilitarised zones in Ukraine (a proposal quickly dismissed by Ukraine’s defence minister, who said it sounded like a “Russian plan")
Intrigue’s take:
There was plenty of
dis
agreement on display in Singapore over the weekend, yet almost everyone seemed to agree on one thing: US-China conflict would be a disaster not just for the two countries, but the entire world.
And so…
given everyone agrees, there should be a path for China and the West to de-escalate. The problem is it’s hard to see one right now:
China’s military build-up and increasing assertiveness have spooked capitals all over, and yet
When other countries respond with their own military build-up to deter China, Beijing interprets that as aggression, and again expands its military in response
This, dear Intriguer, is a classic security dilemma. And it’s hard to break out of one without dialogue. Hence the
many
calls for dialogue over the weekend.
Also worth noting:
China is set to
increase defence spending
this year by 7.2% to $220B. US defence spending is up 4.2% this year, hitting $773B.
Some two dozen spy chiefs also
met on the sidelines
of the summit, including intelligence heads from China, the US, India, Europe, and beyond. The tone was reportedly more direct but more collaborative.
📰
GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES
How different newspapers covered
: Saudi Arabia possibly becoming a new member of the BRICS grouping (Brazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa).
Links
:
Naharnet
,
Global Times
,
Arab News
.
Today’s briefing is sponsored by
girlboss
Girlboss, yes
that
girlboss.
Girlboss is a purpose-driven media company that exists to amplify women's voices and issues. Their aim?
To help women navigate the future of work and life while sparking the thrill of possibility.
Sign up for their Girlboss Daily newsletter—an email you'll actually look forward to—or read our
International Intrigue curated selection of Girlboss content.
Sign up here.
⛏️ CONGO | CRITICAL MINERALS
Credits: Bloomberg.
DRC surpasses Peru as world’s #2 copper exporter
Briefly:
The Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) replaced Peru as the world’s second-biggest exporter of copper last year, in terms of shipment volumes. It’s a notable shift in the copper industry, which has long been dominated by South American countries.
What’s behind this switch in copper rankings?
🇵🇪
Peru’s
copper production has flatlined since 2016, in part due to political instability there, and
🇨🇩
DRC
has tapped into its higher-grade ore potential (meaning more metal can be extracted from the same amount of rock), enabling copper exports to double to 2.4 million tons between 2018 and 2022.
Intrigue’s take:
Countries generally define a ‘critical mineral’ as something that ticks three key boxes:
🏗️ Its supply chain is vulnerable to disruption
🔒 It’s essential to economic and national security, and
👩‍💻
It plays a key role in energy, defence and other tech
Copper ticks each of these three boxes. It’s particularly key to the energy transition. And that makes it the subject of intense geopolitical interest.
Also worth noting:
While Peru is now ranked 3rd and DRC ranked 2nd, Chile remains the world’s top copper exporter.
Peru’s China-owned Las Bambas mine, one of the biggest copper mines in the world, halted production numerous times last year due to
environmental and community protests
.
👀
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Your weekly roundup of quirky global news:
A Canadian won the UK’s famous Cooper Hill cheese race despite being
unconscious for most of the race
.
A commercial pilot in San Diego was forced to
climb through the cockpit window
to unlock his plane.
An AI drone in the US reportedly
tried to kill its operators
after being told to
“destroy the enemy’s air defence systems”
. It turns out the story was a theoretical scenario rather than a real one.
Vending machines in the Japanese town of Ako have been programmed to
release their snacks
in case of an earthquake.
Italian authorities are investigating why the
water in Venice turned neon green
.
🏁
FLAG OF THE DAY
Some flags are subtle in their references to armed struggle and sacrifice; Mozambique chose another route. The banner features an assault rifle with a bayonet (defence), a hoe (agriculture) and an open book (education). Mozambique’s flag is the only UN-recognised flag with a modern firearm.
🗳️ POLL TIME!
What's the world's best airport?
🇯🇵 Tokyo Haneda
🇫🇷 Paris Charles de Gaulle
🇸🇬 Singapore Changi
🇶🇦 Doha Hamad
🇨🇭 Zurich
🇰🇷 Incheon
🇿🇦 Cape Town
🇺🇸 Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta
🇺🇾 Carrasco
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Thursday’s poll:
Do you think Elon Musk's meeting with China's foreign minister was a good idea?
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️ 👍 Yes, business interests can be a force for good in China-US relations (45%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
👎 No, Beijing was using him to wedge the US (51%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 🖋️ Other (write in!)  (4%)
Your two cents:
👍
G.W.K.S:
“Globalisation is generally a good thing for raising human prosperity across the globe. Healing these relationships seems more fruitful than consistent animosity”
🖋️
D.L:
“I'm not sure the meeting had as much to do with national interests as it did with Musk's interests. China may have had a bigger picture in mind, but I suspect Musk didn't.”