URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/chinas-economic-troubles-expend-credit
Title: 🌎 China's economic troubles extend to credit

IN TODAY’S EDITION
1️⃣ China’s plan to revive its economy
2️⃣ Elon claims a win Down Under
3️⃣ National anthems of the day
Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
I’ve recently become someone who starts conversations with “
back in my day
”, and I don’t feel great about that. This has happened in conversations with (younger and hipper) colleagues about the latest house-party banger (‘Million Dollar Baby’, allegedly, and not ‘Low’), but also on the health of China’s economy.
You see, back in my day studying in Beijing in early 2008, China’s economy was going gangbusters. Despite China’s attempts to cool things, it still grew 11% in 2007, the fastest in almost 13 years. The vibes were optimistic, with both China and the West pumped about the Beijing 2008 Olympics.
China’s economy
is now in a very different state, and the vibes are much less exuberant. We’ll dig into that in today’s top story.
THE HEADLINES
Blinken arrives in Kyiv as Russia advances on Kharkiv.
US Secretary of State Antony Blinken
arrived in Ukraine
earlier today (Tuesday) on a surprise visit
to reassure the country of continued US support. Blinken’s visit is the first by a senior US official since Congress approved a long-delayed package of security assistance for Ukraine. Russian forces are currently making gains in northeastern Ukraine, exploiting delays in Western support.
UN says 460,000 Palestinians flee Rafah and northern Gaza.
The UN
says
360,000 Palestinians have been driven out of Rafah amid this week’s “
heavy fighting
”, while Israeli evacuation orders for northern Gaza have displaced another 100,000. Meanwhile, the White House has described reports of Israeli protesters
attacking Gaza-bound aid trucks
as a “
total outrage
”. Protestors have claimed the aid benefits Hamas and want it blocked until all Israeli hostages are freed.
US evicts China-linked crypto miner near nuclear missile base.
The US has ordered MineOne, a British Virgin Islands firm majority-owned by citizens of China,
to relocate within 120 days
- it claims the firm’s current location (within a mile of a nuclear missile base) poses a national security threat.
Ango American announces break-up.
UK-based miner Anglo American has revealed plans to
sell or demerge
its diamond, platinum, and coal mining branches following a takeover bid from rival BHP. Anglo is hoping the restructure will appease investors worried about the company’s financials, and halt calls to accept BHP’s bid (which it’s now rejected twice).
Violent protests in Pakistani Kashmir.
At least four people have died in
violent protests in Pakistan-administered Kashmir
linked to rising flour and electricity prices. Organisers have called off further protests for today after the government agreed to disburse millions in subsidies to help manage costs.
TOP STORY
China looks to ultralong bonds and beyond to revive its economy
Printing money.
China’s Ministry of Finance
confirmed
yesterday (Monday) China’s latest move to boost the world’s second-largest economy: the sale of $140B in ultra-long bonds. It delivers on a commitment Premier Li Qiang made in March.
And the news comes after another batch of disappointing economic numbers:
China’s credit
has shrunk for the first time since 2005
Producer inflation
has declined for the 19th straight month
Foreign investment
into China dropped 56% on the year in Q1, and
There are doubts around the strength of recent import and export figures
So how will bonds help?
Selling government bonds can only mean one thing: Beijing is planning on making it rain again - ie, it’s raising debt to fund more government spending in an attempt to jumpstart the economy.
But why ultra-long bonds?
China has only ever issued these kinds of bonds three times before: to recapitalise its big state banks after the 1998 Asian Financial Crisis; to finance a new sovereign wealth fund in 2007; and to fund its Covid response in 2020.
This time around, there’s no single ‘shock’ - it’s more about boosting central stimulus in a way that a) takes pressure off indebted local governments, b) keeps the spending ‘off budget’, and c) aligns its longer-term debt repayments with the kinds of longer-term spending Beijing has in mind (“
landmark projects
”).
But why now?
In addition to the tough economic numbers we flagged above, there are a few other numbers weighing on Beijing’s mind:
5%
: That’s the 2024 growth target China’s leaders
set back in March
, and reaching it might now be tougher because…
100%
: That’s the new tariff rate President Biden is expected to slap on China-made EVs and other products today (Tuesday), which is on top of…
Three
: That’s how many big waves of restrictions the US has already placed on chip exports to China since late 2022 in an effort to curb its access to advanced tech, all while Beijing’s own clock is ticking because…
Nine
: That’s how many months Xi Jinping will be late when he finally convenes the Communist Party’s third plenum in Beijing this July, with a promised focus on addressing China’s various economic challenges.
So all this to say the pressure is rising for China, both externally and internally.
And in that context, it’s been interesting to see China’s proposed solutions emerging. Some (like February’s rate cut or even the above bond sale) are fairly standard.
But others aren’t - whether it’s the
reports
of indebted local governments exploring ways to
record data as assets
; or the
plans
to turn Hainan, a tropical island the size of Belgium, into
the world’s biggest duty-free zone
.
However, most controversial (at least for the West) is still China’s plan to
double down
on, well, old plans:
boosting
exports
. That’s controversial because the West is becoming more reluctant to accept all those exports, particularly where they’re under-priced (subsidies), over-produced, and risk wiping out local jobs.
So after years of uncertainty, yes, we’re getting a picture of Beijing’s plan: but it’s not all that new, not all that welcome (for some), and it may not all work.
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
Raising debt to boost stimulus is a fine idea, but it depends a lot on how you spend the money. And Premier Li Qiang seemed to acknowledge that fact when he chaired a virtual meeting yesterday, urging officials to put this new cash to good use.
But after decades of ploughing a massive 40% of its GDP into investment, China’s returns are now diminishing, and its options are now shrinking.
Also worth noting:
China’s ailing property sector accounts for up to
20%
of its GDP.
It’s not entirely clear how big China’s local government debt burden is, though estimates are as high as $10T - that’s equivalent to the GDP of Germany and Japan (combined).
SPECIAL EDITIONS, STRAIGHT TO YOUR INBOX
Like our daily briefing, but want to go deeper and get a peek behind the scenes?
We got you. Every month, we’re releasing deep dives on intriguing topics with all the same flair you get here.
This weekend’s special edition will be on the current Indian elections, featuring insights from world-renowned India-watchers
James Crabtree
and
Ravi Agrawal
.
Want in? Simply share Intrigue with two friends using your unique referral code below!
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇰🇿
Kazakhstan
: In a case that’s rocked the country, a Kazakh court has jailed a
former minister of national economy for 24 years
for murdering his wife. The case has ignited a national movement, pushing parliament to criminalise domestic violence in line with OECD standards.
🇩🇪
Germany
: German intelligence authorities are, according to a federal court, justified in
classifying the Alternative for Germany party (AfD) as a “
suspected extremist organisation
”
due to the AfD’s statements against migrants and “
the principles of democracy
”. The AfD is polling second nationally for next month’s European elections.
🇦🇺
Australia
: A court has
denied a request by Australia’s eSafety Commissioner
to extend an injunction against Twitter/X footage of an attack against a bishop last month. Owner Elon Musk had agreed to geo-block the content so it wouldn’t appear for Australians, but he
refused
to comply with the actual injunction which would’ve had a global effect.
🇦🇷
Argentina
: The IMF has agreed to release the
latest $792M tranche of bailout funds
after endorsing Argentina’s austerity measures. While the country continues to endure a tough economic crisis, the IMF has commended President Milei’s libertarian government for some wins, including a fiscal surplus, falling inflation, and surging bond prices.
🇮🇷
Iran
: India has signed a 10-year
deal to jointly operate Iran’s strategic Chabahar port
, including a possible $250M loan to develop a terminal there. India’s ports minister
says
the agreement is part of Prime Minister Modi’s “
vision of enhancing global trade
”, including from India to Central Asia.
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Here’s what people around the world have been googling
​
🇿🇦
South African
sports fans googled ‘
Novak Djokovic
’ after the Serbian tennis legend took
a shock loss at the Italian Open
to Chile’s Alejandro Tabilo, days after accidentally being hit in the head by a bottle.
🇪🇸
Folks in
Spain
searched for ‘elecciones europeas 2024’ (
European elections 2024
) as local authorities prepare to notify which citizens have been
randomly selected
to help out on voting day (6-9 June).
And
🇦🇺
Australians
looked up ‘
aurora australis
’ as geomagnetic storms produced more remarkable lights in the sky over the weekend (our thanks to Brett for sharing
this stunning pic
in the Intrigue WhatsApp group, which is open to anyone who’s shared Intrigue with five friends).
NATIONAL ANTHEMS OF THE DAY
The national anthems of Japan, Jordan, and San Marino.
We’ll be hearing quite a few national anthems when the 2024 Summer Olympics kick off in July. But here are some anthems we’ll be hearing less of… not because these countries suck at sports, but because the national anthems of Japan, Jordan, and San Marino are only four lines long.
🤏
DAILY POLL
What do you think is China's best option to revive its economy?
💰 Lift government spending
🛍️ Remove barriers to foreign investment
📉 Cut interest rates
✂️ Cut taxes
👷 Labour market reforms
🥅 Stronger safety net (so folks spend more)
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think art and politics can ever be separated?
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️
🎶
Yes, true art transcends politics (33%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🤔
No, art is often born out of the political  (64%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!)  (3%)
Your two cents:
🤔
I.F:
“Even when art tries to be completely neutral and separate itself from any politics it ends up sending a message.”
🤔
J.M:
“It's possible to have nonpolitical art, but that doesn't make it better or ‘true’.”
🎶
E.B:
“If we could not see beyond the politics, how could we enjoy art from outside our time or culture? Yet we marvel at great works like the pyramids, the Sistine Chapel, and the Great Wave of Hokusai — often with very little understanding of the context of their creation. We can explore the politics surrounding the making of these artworks for a different perspective, but it is not necessary in order to appreciate their beauty.”
Was this forwarded to you? We're a team of ex-diplomats producing a concise and engaging geopolitical briefing for 90k+ leaders each day.
It’s free to subscribe
.