URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/chinas-naval-base-cambodia
Title: 🌍 China's naval base in Cambodia?

Today’s newsletter supported by:
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Diplomacy is full of intrigue and high-stakes theatrics, but sometimes it's as simple as showing up each day on social media to connect through origami. Japan’s Consul-General in Seattle
Hisao Inagaki
continues to unleash his ‘crane of the day’ without fail - the guy is currently on day 1069!
Today’s briefing is a 4 min read:
🎖️ A controversial
naval base
in Cambodia.
🔥
A regional look at wildfires in
Europe
and
North Africa
.
➕
Plus:
An unexpected Roman tomb, how the papers are covering the upcoming Russia-Africa summit, and why Chileans are googling ‘Cecilia’.
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇨🇳
China
: Foreign Minister Qin Gang has been
replaced by his predecessor Wang Yi
after a month of unexplained absence. Beijing hasn’t given a reason, though the scrubbing of Qin‘s record from government websites suggests he may be under investigation.
🇷🇺
Russia
: Lawmakers voted to
raise the age of conscription from 27 to 30
, expanding the number of men liable to join Russia’s military for one year of compulsory service. Over 145,000 Russian men were drafted earlier this year.
🇮🇩
Indonesia
: A
Taliban delegation visited Indonesia
earlier this month seeking closer economic ties with the world’s most populous Muslim nation. Afghanistan is in the midst of a prolonged economic crisis.
🇪🇨
Ecuador
: Quito has announced a
state of emergency in three provinces
following the deadly shooting of a mayor. The motive remains unclear, but gang-related homicides have spiked in the past five years.
🇾🇪
Yemen
: The UN has begun
extracting a million barrels of oil
from an old tanker off Yemen’s coast. UN officials have warned for years of the risks posed by the vessel, which could leak four times as much oil as the 1989 Exxon Valdez disaster off Alaska.
🎖️
Cambodia | Defence & security
A controversial naval base takes shape in Cambodia
Construction of naval infrastructure at the Ream Naval Base in Cambodia is nearly complete, according to
satellite imagery
from US-based Blacksky.
Beijing and Phnom Penh
acknowledge China has helped fund and build expansions on the base, but they deny China will have access. Cambodia even
points out
that hosting a foreign base would breach its constitution.
But Western intelligence
has long claimed otherwise, noting Ream’s new pier is nearly identical to the one at China’s base in Djibouti. And both piers are long enough to berth China’s aircraft carriers (Cambodia has no such assets).
It’s easy to guess why China would be interested in Ream. It’d serve as:
⛽ A place for ships to refuel and resupply, enabling China’s navy to venture farther afield
💣 A safe haven in the event of conflict with the US, as Washington might hesitate to target Chinese assets in a third country, and
🚢
A springboard to control critical chokepoints, like the nearby Strait of Malacca between Malaysia and Indonesia.
That last point is key: 40% of global trade (including 60% of China’s oil supply) goes through Malacca. So in the event of conflict, whoever controls the Strait (just 2.8km wide at its narrowest point) would have a leg-up.
Intrigue's take:
It’s been interesting to see how much intel the West has been willing to share publicly in the context of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine: Russia repeatedly denied it was going to invade. And then it did.
US intel has likewise been pretty forward-leaning on the Ream base. But China has repeatedly denied the US accusations. So the world will be watching Ream berthing schedules with interest.
Also worth noting:
US Defense Secretary Austin arrives today (Wednesday) in Papua New Guinea, which just
granted
the US access to six military sites.
China
initially deflected
claims it was establishing its first overseas base in Djibouti (which then opened in 2017). Beijing routinely
highlights
Washington’s large network of military bases.
📰
How newspapers covered…
The upcoming Russia-Africa Summit
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
“Kremlin accuses West of trying to sabotage its showcase Russia-Africa summit”
New York, US
“Russia wants allies, so it’s hosting an Africa summit. Food security and Wagner group top the agenda”
Johannesburg, South Africa
“Access denied — Daily Maverick barred from Russia-Africa Summit after journalist accreditation revoked”
Today’s newsletter is supported by: Acclimate
Get plugged into the energy transition
We cover what matters in climate tech, business, and policy. Delivered twice per week, for free.
Subscribe now!
🔥
Mediterranean | Climate
The Mediterranean is on fire
This year’s record-setting heatwave (aptly named Cerberus after the infernal multi-headed hound) has reduced large areas of southern Europe and North Africa to kindling.
And now blazes are raging (with lives lost) across the region:
🇩🇿
Thousands of soldiers have been deployed around
Algeria
to tame the country’s 97 wildfires
🇬🇷
Authorities in
Greece
have carried out the country’s biggest-ever evacuation after 62 new wildfires erupted there just on Saturday (the hottest day of the summer so far), and
🇮🇹
Italian
authorities have had to shut airports and cancel flights in Palermo and Catania, cutting off Sicily’s two main air links.
Fires are also burning in France, Spain, Turkey, Croatia, and basically any other Mediterranean country you can think of.
Intrigue’s take:
Wildfires are a common phenomenon in the Mediterranean, but the
UN’s latest scientific review
foreshadowed climate change’s exacerbating role there.
And there’s a regional piece at play, too: the
Union for the Mediterranean
was set up precisely to deepen disaster relief cooperation across the Mediterranean. It’s apparently struggled for attention lately, but something tells us that’ll change after this summer.
Also worth noting:
The Mediterranean is
warming up 20% faster
than the rest of the world. It’s now at its
hottest in recorded history
.
Earlier this year, Algerian authorities acquired
six water-bombing aircraft
, leased several others, and started constructing landing strips to prepare for wildfire season.
➕
Extra Intrigue
Here’s what people around the world googled on Tuesday 25 July:
🇨🇱
Chileans
looked up their legendary singer-songwriter ‘
Cecilia, la incomparable
’ after learning of
her passing
.
Our
🇧🇷
Brazilian
friends were busy googling ‘Nova Zelândia x Filipinas’
(New Zealand x Philippines)
, as
the Philippines scored their
first ever FIFA Women’s World Cup win
against the tournament’s co-hosts.
🇭🇰
Hong Kong
residents looked up the latest news on ‘秦刚’ (
Qin Gang
), China’s missing foreign minister who’s
just been replaced
.
🗳️ Poll time!
What do you think about Israel's recent judicial reform limiting the powers of the Supreme Court?
👍 I agree with it, and here's why...
👎 I disagree with it, and here's why...
🖋️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
📸
Photo of the day
An archaeologist cleans a lead sarcophagus at an excavation site in Gaza. Credits: Rizek Abdeljawad
Archaeologists in northern Gaza have unearthed a 2,000-year-old Roman cemetery featuring at least 125 tombs and two sarcophagi encased in lead. Construction workers first made the discovery by chance last year, and experts say the site was used to bury top officials in the Roman province of Judaea.
Yesterday’s poll:
What do you think is the most important factor to spur private investment?
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️
💸
Tax breaks  (22%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 👨‍⚖️ Independent courts (9%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
📖
Technical assistance (3%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️
📉
Opening up markets (18%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
✂️ Slashing red tape (33%)
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 🎓 Boosting local skills (13%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!)  (3%)
Your two cents
:
✍️
C.B:
“Private investment is a long-game that has more to do with the perceived stability and viability of the nation than with short-term carrots like tax breaks.”
✂️
G.J:
“For small business owners, navigating the barrage of senseless local, provincial, and national regulations is far too cumbersome.”
👨‍⚖️
L.L:
“Without an independent judiciary no foreign company can proceed with confidence.”