URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/china-imposes-metal-export-curb
Title: 🌍 China imposes metal export curb

Today’s newsletter supported by:
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
We love sports as much as the next fan… unless the next fan is
Ochirvaani Batbold
: he’s cycling 10,000km from his home in Mongolia to see Manchester United play for the first time. And he’s on track to be there smashing an Old Trafford pie by December.
Today’s briefing is a 5 min read:
🇨🇳
China
restricts key metal exports in tit-for-tat.
🇸🇳
Senegal
just stepped back from the brink.
➕
Plus:
A major milestone in Indonesia, how the papers are covering Vietnam banning the
Barbie
movie, and why folks in Jakarta are googling ‘treasure’.
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇨🇳
China
: Beijing has
cancelled next week’s visit by Josep Borrell
, the EU’s top diplomat. China didn’t immediately offer a reason for its decision.
🇳🇴
Norway
: Former Prime Minister Jens Stoltenberg will
stay on as NATO Secretary-General for another year
, pushing back a contentious decision on his successor. It’s the fourth time NATO members have extended his term.
🇸🇧
Solomon Islands
: Prime Minister Manasseh Sogavare is seeking to review his country’s
security pact with Australia
, following a visit by Australia’s defence minister. The Australian minister’s visit came days before Sogavare’s planned trip to China this week.
🇬🇹
Guatemala
: A court has ordered the
review of last month’s first round election results
, following a petition by several parties. Some observers assess that local power brokers may be creating the conditions for an “electoral coup”.
🇰🇪
Kenya
: Oxford has
presented 98 cows to two Maasai families
during a traditional ‘cleansing’ ceremony, after a Kenyan man found Maasai artefacts in one of the university’s museums. The families welcomed the gesture, but said they expect compensation for the items they say were stolen.
🇨🇳
China | Tech
The US-China tech rivalry risks short-circuiting the whole industry.
China restricts key metal exports
Beijing is restricting the export of niche metals used in semiconductors, citing national security grounds. Chinese firms looking to sell certain gallium and germanium products abroad will need a special licence from 1 August.
Been a while since you took chemistry?
📟 Gallium is a soft, silvery metal used in advanced circuitry, and
🔭
Germanium is a brittle, grey metal used in advanced optics
They’re the ‘special sauce’
in everything from semiconductors, LEDs, and niche comms gear, through to weapons-sighting and night-vision systems.
And China produces
98%
of the world’s gallium and
80%
of the germanium. So its new export curbs will
be felt just about everywhere.
Why’d China do this?
The official
statement
(in Mandarin) says it was to
“safeguard national security and interests”
, and
State media
then said the quiet bit out loud, linking the new measures to the West
“relentlessly stepping up crackdowns on China's technological development”
.
Intrigue's take:
When the world’s two largest economies get into a trade war, collateral damage is inevitable. That explains some of the early reactions:
🇰🇷
South Korea
has called
an emergency meeting on the new rules
🇯🇵
Japan
says
it’s scrutinising China’s rules for WTO violations, and
🇪🇺
The EU
was quick to
express
… “concern” (
🔥
🔥
🔥
🔥
)
But the move will impact China, too: it risks vindicating concerns about China’s coercive economic policies, and accelerating the West’s “de-risking”.
For now, the new process is technically just a licensing requirement; a lot will depend on what China does with it. And that probably gives China leverage.
Also worth noting:
Gallium and germanium are also used in solar panels and EVs.
The Netherlands
just expanded
(on Friday) its own restrictions on the export of advanced machinery that produces semiconductors.
Washington is reportedly looking to
limit China’s access to cloud services
provided by US companies such as Amazon and Microsoft.
📰
How newspapers covered…
Vietnam banning the upcoming
Barbie
movie
Auckland,
New Zealand
“
Barbie
movie: Vietnam has banned the family-friendly film for an ‘offensive’ map image”
Buenos Aires, Argentina
“Vietnam bans the release of
Barbie
movie for showing a map favouring China”
New York, US
“‘Now I must see it’:
Barbie
movie banned in Vietnam, praised in China over controversial South China Sea map”
Today’s newsletter is supported by The Future Party
The future isn’t a mystery
Want to receive the latest in business, entertainment, and internet culture right to your inbox every single morning?
Not just the stuff everyone else is covering -- these are the stories that drive the future, all in a quick and witty package. That’s what TheFutureParty newsletter is all about.
With every email you open, every story you read, you’re going to have the jump on the rest of the crowd. And you’ll be that much more prepared for the day -- and week, and month, and year -- ahead. Join over 100,000 driven creative professionals who read the newsletter every day.
Join the community.
🇸🇳
Senegal | Elections
Opposition figure Ousmane Sonko (L) and President Macky Sall (R)
Senegal steps back from the brink
In a highly anticipated speech, Senegalese President Macky Sall announced Monday that he won’t seek a controversial third term in February’s elections.
Why the controversy
?
⛔ Senegal’s constitution says third terms aren’t even allowed, but
📜
A recent constitutional revision made each term shorter, and
⏲️ Sall’s supporters were arguing that this reset the clock for him
Sall himself was keeping pretty coy there for a while
, dropping a “
ni oui, ni non
” (neither yes nor no) when asked if he’d run again. So when his fiercest critic was barred from office this year, it seemed something was up.
Intrigue’s take:
Now that the president has ruled out a third term, there’s some relief that Senegal’s institutions will be spared this particular test.
But this saga is a reminder that democracies don’t rest on a constitution alone, nor are they defended by institutions alone. Much still comes down to people; whether it’s the thousands of recent protestors, or the president’s acknowledgement on Monday that
"
Senegal is more than me
."
Also worth noting:
Courts in Senegal have this year convicted firebrand opposition figure Ousmane Sonko of
libel
and
“
corrupting the youth
”
, effectively barring him from running for president next year.
Protests broke out after Sonko’s convictions, leading to several deaths.
➕
Extra Intrigue
Here’s what people around the world were googling yesterday, Tuesday 4 July.
Internet users in the
🇬🇧
UK
were busy searching for ‘
Kyle Richards
’, to get the latest deets on the
end of the reality TV star’s relationship
.
🇮🇩
Indonesian
K-pop fans inundated Google with searches about boy band
‘TREASURE’
,
which recently
signed with Columbia Records
.
And folks in ​
🇪🇬
Egypt
searched high and low for information on ‘كاس مصر’ (
Egypt Cup
), a
football league
currently playing.
🗳️ Poll time!
Do you think car-free zones in cities should be the norm?
🚶 Yes, they encourage public transport use and reduce air pollution
🛍️ No, they discourage commercial activity and do little to help the environment
🖋️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
📜
Today in history
Credits: The Economist (2004).
On this day in 2004, Indonesians went to the polls to vote in the country’s first ever direct presidential election. Turnout hit 78% in the first round, and Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono (a retired general) ended up winning in the second round.
Monday’s poll:
What's going on in France?
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️ ⚖️ It's due to France's colonial history (17%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
📊
It's due to France's economic policies (5%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️ 🚔 It's due to France's policing approach (17%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️
🏫
It's due to France's social policies (24%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🌍 It's due to France's immigration policies (31%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!) (6%)
Your two cents
:
✍️
J.D:
“Mix of France's colonial history, economic and social policies which have informed immigration policies...The police think they have impunity so that is also an issue. It's complex and shows signs of deep unrest and need for systems change.”
✍️ Many Intriguers wrote in with “all of the above” or similar.
✍️
Corrections corner
Our thanks to Rowena for pointing out that the police officer involved in last week’s Nanterre shooting was charged with
‘voluntary homicide’
. And thanks also to Subha for noticing that we dropped our Turkmenistan pin on Uzbekistan
🤦
.