URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/cuba-s-mystery-shootout
Title: 🌍 Cuba’s mystery shootout

Today’s briefing:
— Cuba’s mystery shootout
— Another war returns
— The ultimate embassy flex
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. You’re probably seeing a lot of chatter about a possible US/Israeli attack on Iran. From the well-publicised locations of US military assets in the region (usually top secret), to “
leaks
” from senior military officials, and multiple puff pieces about Iran’s exiled crown prince, you’d be forgiven for thinking an attack is a foregone conclusion.
But I find it helpful to ask myself: why am I reading this now?
No one on Twitter actually knows what’s going on, but they benefit from the engagement an “
imminent
” war brings. Real leaks of highly classified information are rare; what you read in the papers is usually an authorised background briefing designed to push a narrative.
I don’t know, maybe an attack on Iran is imminent, or maybe it’s all to put pressure on the negotiations in Geneva. Asking the question might not give you the ultimate answer, but it can help you spot the various agendas swimming in our modern media soup.
Failing that, just keep reading Intrigue where it’s our job to figure it all out for you.
Today’s mystery: why were four people on a speedboat shot dead by Cuban forces on Wednesday?
The game is afoot.
Cuban crisis
A speedboat, heavily-armed men, Cuban sunsets, soaring stakes. This is not Denis Villeneuve pitching his next
Bond
, but actual events from Wednesday.
That’s when the communist-run island’s interior ministry issued a
note
detailing
an intriguing incident
involving a Florida-tagged speedboat. According to Cuba’s account…
the island’s coast guard spotted the speedboat a mile off Cuba’s shores
they approached the mysterious boat to request identification, and then…
the speedboat’s passengers opened fire, initiating a shootout that left four of the aggressors dead and the remaining six wounded (a Cuban officer got injured too).
Then a few hours later, Havana dropped a
second note
, adding
further intrigue
:
the Cubans say they arrested another guy who’d flown in to help the landing party
the speedboat had “
assault rifles, handguns, improvised explosive devices (Molotov cocktails), body armor, telescopic sights, and camouflage uniforms
”, and…
following interrogations, authorities determined the men
“intended to carry out an infiltration for terrorist purposes
”.
Then yesterday (Thursday), Havana started naming names. Turns out they're
all US-based Cuban nationals
(at least two also had US citizenship), including…
Conrado Galindo Sariol
(detained), a former political prisoner in Cuba who just told an exile outlet last year, “
before I die, I would like to see her [Cuba] free
”
Héctor Duani Cruz Correa
(dead), a tiler with two daughters in Cuba, who seems to have stolen the speedboat from his former boss in the Florida Keys
Amijail Sánchez González
(detained), who’s done prior US jail stints (eg aggravated battery) and was already on Cuba’s terrorism watchlist over alleged arms smuggling to mount attacks against the Cuban military, and…
Michel Ortega Casanova
(dead), whose Tampa associate told
reporters the guy wanted to “
go and fight against a criminal and murderous narco-tyrannical government, to see if that would spark the people to rise up
”.
And… what’s the US saying about all this?
Not much, beyond denying any involvement, and ordering its own investigation.
So… what’s the real story here?
Here are
three of the most intriguing theories doing the rounds:
Was it a botched extraction?
The small sand islands near the shooting are a common departure point for locals desperate to escape to the US (90mi / 145km away), particularly as Cuba’s economic crisis worsens. So that’s
a theory now doing the rounds in Florida
: maybe Cuban exiles tried to extract their relatives (like Héctor’s two daughters), then panicked when caught.
And sure,
it’s happened before
— eg, five died when Cuba sprung a similar smuggling attempt in 2022. But on this occasion, some details aren’t a neat fit: the speedboat was already at or near capacity, and its passengers were seemingly armed like Arnie.
Was it a lone wolf infiltration attempt?
At least three of those onboard (Galindo, Sánchez, and Ortega) were openly campaigning to oust Cuba's regime: in fact, just two weeks ago, a frustrated Sánchez dropped
a video
pledging he — unlike US-based émigré elites — was “
ready to die
” to free Cuba.
So, all those details…?
A yoinked boat, an angry video, plus family members stranded amid a worsening humanitarian situation? They all lend credence to some kind of lone wolf attempt to take matters into their own hands.
Was it US-backed?
The US is now (again) openly yearning for regime change in Havana, and has a long history of pursuing that goal via
Cuban exiles
— they bring plausible deniability, endless motivation, local knowledge / networks, and more popular legitimacy.
Folks are also wondering why the
US Coast Guard
didn’t intercept the speedboat given the US president had just extended the relevant maritime interdiction authority.
So there are clearly (reported) details here that
overlap with known US intent and tactics
. But while JFK’s infamous Bay of Pigs debacle wasn't exactly a picture of precision, it still reflected a degree of US coordination, training, and supply.
As for this speedboat incident?
Parts just look so amateurish
: the boat theft, the profiles, the video, and even the results (all dead / captured before even reaching shore). It’s just hard to square the US pulling sci-fi moves against Maduro, then opting for a tiler stealing his boss’s 1981 Pro-Line pleasure boat for a big move against Cuba.
Even Havana itself has stopped short of alleging direct US involvement, instead
framing
these events more as the US affording diaspora Cuban groups too much impunity.
Intrigue’s Take
The last time Cuba’s regime was under this much pressure (post Soviet-collapse), and open dissent was this risky, locals famously ordered their
Cuba Libre
(‘free Cuba’, aka a rum and cola) by stroking their chin then drawing their thumb across their neck: ie, implying Cuba would be free once Castro was dead.
It then took another quarter century for Castro to die in 2016, and his younger brother Raul is now 94 but still makes public appearances and remains highly influential — Raul’s chosen successor (Diaz-Canel) basically got his gig by pledging post-Castro Castroism.
So… our assessment?
We’re operating off limited info, and there are (say) DC incentives to downplay any US role or diaspora militancy, plus regime incentives to frame this as terrorism. But that last “
impunity
” statement from Cuba’s deputy foreign minister above is telling:
Take decades of Cuban authoritarianism, a darkening humanitarian situation, no end in sight, and an active US-based diaspora big enough to include fringes openly stewing for revenge, freedom, and family, all while US authorities presumably have bigger fish to fry?
Against that backdrop, Occam’s razor suggests
a blend of theories one (extraction) and/or two (infiltration)
fits the most facts, accounts for the clearest motives, and requires the fewest assumptions. We say ‘blend’ because maybe some onboard planned to sneak ashore to foment an uprising, while others would return to the US with their families.
But to be clear, we don’t know, and maybe we’ll never know.
Today’s briefing is presented by…
Become An AI Expert In Just 5 Minutes
If you’re a decision maker at your company, you need to be on the bleeding edge of, well, everything. But before you go signing up for seminars, conferences, lunch ‘n learns, and all that jazz, just know there’s a far better (and simpler) way:
Subscribing to The Deep View.
This daily newsletter condenses everything you need to know about the
latest and greatest AI developments
into a 5-minute read. Squeeze it into your morning coffee break and before you know it, you’ll be an expert too.
Subscribe right here
. It’s totally free, wildly informative, and trusted by 600,000+ readers at Google, Meta, Microsoft, and beyond.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇵🇰
PAKISTAN
-
War with the Taliban.
Pakistan’s defence minister has declared “
open war
” against Taliban-run Afghanistan amid the latest cycle of retaliatory cross-border strikes. (
BBC
)
Comment:
Pakistan has spent years backing the Taliban via the adjacent TTP as a cudgel to deter India, only for that cudgel to hit back: the risk of proxies. We
explored
this one back in October, and foreshadowed the inevitability of this sequel.
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
Anthropic doesn’t bow.
Anthropic CEO Dario Amodei has
stated
his company “
cannot in good conscience
” agree to the Pentagon’s demands for unfettered access to its AI models in “
any lawful use
”, reiterating his opposition to mass domestic surveillance and fully autonomous weapons. The Pentagon’s undersecretary moved to calm tensions by
[*checks notes*]
calling Amodei a liar with a God-complex — DC’s argument is US warfighters shouldn’t need Amodei’s permission to defend America. (
TechCrunch
)
Comment:
The Pentagon’s comply-or-go deadline expires 5pm today (Friday). We wrote about this showdown
here
.
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
That's gonna cost you.
China is considering joining the ~100 other nations already imposing taxes on sugary drinks: it’s both a health measure and a revenue-raiser. (
FT
$)
🇩🇰
DENMARK
-
Oh, snap.
Prime Minister Frederiksen has called snap parliamentary elections for March 24, looking to pull a Carney and capitalise on high approvals amid her pushback on Trump’s Greenland talk. She warns her country is facing
“the Russian war machine from the east, threats from the west and the risk of terror from the south.”
(
NYT
$)
🇲🇲
MYANMAR
-
Outer space.
Russia's space agency chief has paid a visit to junta-led Myanmar, offering to help train the nation’s first astronaut, while securing local agreement to host new ✌️ground-tracking and data-collection facilities✌️. (
Reuters
)
Comment:
Those sassy air quotes are because these proposed assets would inevitably
a
) offer the Kremlin a strategic foothold to collect intelligence on Indian Ocean and Malacca Strait naval activity, plus
b
) it’s a big prestige flex for two pariahs.
🇻🇪
VENEZUELA
-
Who’s picking up the tab?
Appearing back in a Manhattan courtroom, former dictator Nicolás Maduro has asked a US federal judge to dismiss charges against him, arguing US sanctions are blocking the Venezuelan state funds he needs to finance his defence. (
AP
)
Comment:
It’s a quirky legal situation: Maduro’s lawyer warns he’ll resign if Venezuela can’t cover his fees, but any right to state finance stems from Maduro’s capacity as president, a status Trump has never recognised.
🇦🇴
ANGOLA
-
Money honey.
Angola's state-owned oil company is in talks with China over a $4.8B loan for a planned new refinery in the Atlantic port of Lobito. (
Business Insider Africa
)
Comment:
It’s interesting because after years of aggressively paying-down its debt to China, this circling back suggests the sheer economics of trying to curb Angola’s reliance on offshore refining now outweigh the risks of re-entering China’s debt orbit.
Extra Intrigue
Three stories we couldn’t shoehorn in this week
🥾
Politics:
Former New Zealand leader Jacinda Ardern has made headlines with word she’s
relocated
her young family over to Sydney, Australia.
Multilaterals:
The World Economic Forum’s Børge Brende (former Norwegian politician and diplomat) has
resigned
over his Epstein ties.
Art:
London’s Victoria and Albert Museum has
acquired
a reconstructed version of the first ever video posted to YouTube, titled
“Me at the zoo”
.
Embassy of the day
The Finnish embassy in New Delhi. Credits: Tuomas Uusheimo / ALA.
Embassies with pools are such a flex.
We never got so lucky, though given how famously risk-averse and bureaucratic foreign ministries can be, maybe we feel a dash of relief at never having to sign some 16-page safety form before pulling a sweet cannon-ball en route to greet the deputy roads minister at the airport on a Sunday morning.
We
can
confirm the Swiss residence in D.C. has one, and word is the annual soirée permits guests to jump in after midnight, but we’ve never managed to kick on that late.
Anyway, that pool above is from Finland’s embassy in Delhi’s leafy embassy district of Chanakyapuri. First designed by a Finnish architect power couple who won the foreign ministry’s design competition in the 1960s, it aims to link snowy Finnish landscapes to India’s soaring Himalayas.
Friday Quiz
It’s the Dominican Republic’s independence day (Friday 27th)
What year did the Dominican Republic gain independence?
1920
1844
1990
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Which country shares an island with the Dominican Republic?
Haiti
Cuba
Puerto Rico
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Which dance genre originates from the Dominican Republic?
(we've only included one of the country's ~2 dances below)
Salsa
Lambada
Merengue
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate