URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/saudi-investment-forum
Title: 🌍 Davos in the Desert

Today’s newsletter supported by:
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
We regret to advise that Salzburg airport does
not
have a helpdesk for tourists
accidentally flying to Austria instead of Australia. It was just an
ad campaign
.
But we live in hope for such a helpdesk in Sydney, Canada, where tourists do
occasionally
stagger out into the snow looking for the beaches of Sydney, Australia.
Today’s briefing is a 5 min read:
🇸🇦
Saudi Arabia
hosts an investment forum near a war.
🇭🇰
Hong Kong
is still in a slump.
➕
Plus:
A presidential assassination, how the papers are covering a migration summit in Mexico, and why folks in Turkey are tweeting about steam.
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇹🇭
Thailand:
The Thai Navy plans to buy a frigate
instead of a submarine
after Germany banned its engines from being used by the Chinese manufacturer. Thailand had four subs decommissioned after World War II, and has spent decades trying to replace them.
🇷🇺
Russia
: Russia’s upper house has voted to
rescind its ratification
of a decades-old nuclear test ban treaty. The move now awaits final approval from President Putin, who says Russia is ‘mirroring’ the US (which signed but never ratified the treaty).
🇦🇺
Australia
: Prime Minister Anthony Albanese announced at the White House yesterday (Wednesday) a $65M plan to
build undersea internet cables
to eight Pacific Island nations. The partners have contracted Google to build the cables.
🇨🇷
Costa Rica
: Investigators have
opened an inquiry
into the disappearance of $6.2M from the country's aptly-named national bank, Banco Nacional. Five bank employees are suspected to have stolen the money, which amounts to .06% of the bank’s total assets.
🇹🇷
Turkey:
To a standing ovation from his party yesterday,
President
Erdogan said Hamas
isn’t a terrorist group, but rather “
a group of mujahideen defending their lands
”. Erdogan also cancelled a planned trip to Israel, which would’ve been his first since 2005.
🇸🇦
Saudi Arabia | Geo-economics
The 7th edition of the Future Investment Initiative kicked off this week. Credits: FII.
Saudi Arabia kicks off its ‘Davos in the Desert’
Saudi Arabia’s
Future Investment Initiative
, nicknamed ‘Davos in the desert’, kicked off on Tuesday as global business and finance leaders descended on Riyadh’s Ritz-Carlton hotel for three days of talks.
Does that hotel ring a bell?
It’s the same spot where the crown prince (‘MBS’) infamously detained 400 of the kingdom’s princes, tycoons, and ministers for a violent ‘
purge
’ just days after his first Desert Davos in 2017.
His second Davos in the Desert was in October 2018.
Does that month ring a bell?
It’s when Saudi officials dismembered Saudi dissident writer Jamal Khashoggi in the kingdom’s Istanbul consulate. Most of the conference’s A-list attendees pulled out after the news broke.
But this week’s attendee list suggests the event is definitely back
, with a pretty broad agenda including:
🤖
AI
- Saudi Arabia’s sovereign wealth fund called for
global partnerships
to shape the development of AI
🔋
Manufacturing
- The kingdom
announced
a new Hyundai car plant with Korea’s president, who attended the event, and
🏙️ Neom
- Riyadh unveiled a
$10B deal
with Danish logistics giant DSV to support the construction of the Neom desert megacity.
Intrigue's take:
One topic that was notably absent? The Israel-Hamas war a few hundred miles away, and the unfolding humanitarian crisis in Gaza.
The week’s Ritz-Carlton program opened on Gaza’s deadliest day
reported
to date. But Saudi officials are avoiding interviews, and guest speakers seem to be following their lead, with only a few notable (if broad) mentions of the war from folks like the
IMF chief
and
Citigroup CEO
.
This approach suggests the Saudis are well aware what’s at stake for them and the entire region if the Israel-Hamas war spreads.
Also worth noting:
Reports
emerged
overnight of a brief Israeli ground raid into Gaza ahead of an expected wider invasion.
📰
How newspapers covered…
A migration summit hosted by Mexico
Mérida, Mexico
“Latin America migration summit: Mexico faces an unprecedented crisis”
Miami, US
“Mexico is hosting several countries to discuss regional migration. The U.S. is not among them”
Havana, Cuba
“Mexican Summit on Migration Opposes “Coercive Measures””
Today’s newsletter is supported by: Ryse
Last chance to invest before this company becomes a household name
What if you had the opportunity to invest in the biggest electronics products before they launched into big box retail, would you?
Through retail distribution deals with
Best Buy
, Ring changed doorbells and Nest changed thermostats. Early investors in these companies earned
massive returns,
but the opportunity to invest was limited to a select, wealthy few.
The game has changed, and for once, investors can invest in a company that’s gearing up for a massive retail rollout.
RYSE
is set to debut in 100+ Best Buy stores
this month
, and you're in luck—you can still invest at only $1.25/share before their name becomes known nationwide.
They have patented
the only mass-market shade automation device
, and their exclusive deal with Best Buy resembles that which led Ring and Nest to their
billion-dollar buyouts
.
Learn how you can become a shareholder and earn bonus shares for a limited time.
🇭🇰
Hong Kong | Geo-economics
Hong Kong’s economy needs a hand
Hong Kong’s chief executive, John Lee, announced several major tax cuts during his
annual policy address
yesterday (Wednesday).
The city’s status as East Asia’s premier business hub has been in question since (if not before) Beijing started openly
consolidating power
over Hong Kong in 2020. And its economy has taken a hit:
📉
Trading volumes at Hong Kong’s
stock exchange
have slumped for three straight years as foreign investors withdraw, and
🏠 House prices have
slipped 15%
from their 2021 peak.
So Lee’s hoping to turn things around with some targeted tax cuts.
Intrigue’s take:
There are lots of ways to imagine Hong Kong’s future, but here are two:
☝️
Scenario 1:
The city is just in a transition period. There might be an exodus of Western companies, but they’ll soon be replaced by firms from the mainland plus China’s new partners in the Gulf and beyond.
✌️
Scenario 2:
As Beijing erodes the city’s unique legal status, it also erodes the thing that’s long made Hong Kong thrive, leaving it the poorer, integrated cousin among China’s ‘Greater Bay Area’ of cities like Shenzhen.
Lee seems to be banking on scenario 1, but it’s not really his call.
Also worth noting:
Lee’s address lasted
3 hours and 22 minutes
and included 60 references to the “
Bay Area
”.
➕
Extra Intrigue
Here’s what people around the world googled yesterday, Wednesday 25 October
🇬🇧
Britons
searched for ‘
Dave Courtney
’ after the former
gangster-turned-actor
passed away.
🇹🇷
Folks in
Turkey
googled
‘Steam’
after the popular videogame distribution platform
announced
it was no longer pricing its service in the volatile Turkish Lira.
🇪🇬
And
Egyptian
football fans looked for ‘
super league
’ after the continent’s new eight-team
African Football League
kicked off.
🗳️ Poll time!
Do you think Hong Kong will lose its status as a leading financial hub?
⛔ Yes, it's on its way if it hasn't lost that status already
🤔 No, less Western doesn't mean less important
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
📜
Today in history
Kim Jae-kyu, director of the Korean Central Intelligence Agency, stands trial for assassinating President Park Chung-hee in 1979. Credits: The Korean Herald.
Today in 1979, South Korean President Park Chung-hee was
assassinated
by his erstwhile friend and head of Korea’s Central Intelligence Agency, Kim Jae-kyu. Kim later explained he had killed Park (at dinner) to restore democracy in the country, though many believe he did so to preserve his own power.
Thursday’s poll:
If you were the leader of your country, what % of GDP would you set apart for defence spending and why?
(The global average is currently 2.2%)
1️⃣ 0% ⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️  (4%)
2️⃣ 1-2%
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️  (32%)
3️⃣ 3-5%
🟩
🟩
🟩
⬜️⬜️  (46%)
4️⃣ 6-10%
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️  (11%)
5️⃣ >10%
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️  (7%)
Your two cents
:
1️⃣ 0%
N.C:
“Let’s all just try to get along!”
2️⃣ 1-2%
S.Z:
“Context is super important too. If you are like Armenia and squished between two antagonistic countries, you probably should up your defense spending. If you are New Zealand? Probably just chill.”
3️⃣ 3-5%
L.K
,
S.A
, &
R.V:
“If you want peace, prepare for war.” [Vegetius]