URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/deck-halls-international-intrigue
Title: Deck the Halls with International Intrigue

Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
We’re all looking forward to the upcoming “New Year, New Me” content, but first, let’s enjoy these final days of 2023 with some last-minute gift suggestions for the upcoming holidays.
Feeling stuck for present ideas? We’ve got you covered… and honestly, this was a welcome break from writing about geopolitics
😂
.
P.S. All of these gift ideas came from Team Intrigue. We do not earn any commission through these links.
- Team Intrigue
🧑‍💼
For the
Geopolitical Analyst
in your life…
A
Magic 8 Ball
, because how else will they predict the future?
Every geopolitical analyst needs this slick
leather-cased card set
to look broody in their local coffee shop while playing solitaire.
Bookends? Fancy door stoppers? We’ll do you one better:
walnut dumbbells
with gold trim.
The geopolitical analyst in your life probably doesn’t have an assistant. Help them pretend they do with this wearable
AI pin
from Humane AI.
Your new best friend. Credit: Humane AI
For long days spent at the desk, they’ll need an
Ember heatable mug
.
Our resident DC-ites tell us that in-person events and business cards are going strong in the Capital - so be sure to take good notes and keep those connections with this
Monocle Wallet Notebook
.
Think you’re smart? Try again: this
do-it-yourself mystery book
has only been solved by four people since 1934.
Give the gift that keeps on giving with this
book subscription
(deliveries every two months, so it won’t feel like drinking from a firehose).
How else can one plot out world domination other than with
the
ultimate board game of
Risk
?
🕵🏻‍♀️ For your favourite (aspiring)
diplomat
…
Few trench coats are more iconic than the
Burberry
, perfect for staying undercover while in style.
For freshening up after long nights of “information gathering”, check out this
skin-boosting care kit
.
What could be more embarrassing than bad breath in an important meeting? Don’t get caught out; use a
sleek Quip electric toothbrush
instead.
When thinking of nice pens, you probably think of a swanky Montblanc, but that’s hardly practical for the day-to-day. And no one does simple yet effective better than the Japanese, so check out these
Muji pens
.
James Bond Destinations Book. Credit: Assouline
Organising your suitcase for a long trip away from home is never fun, but these Intrigue-verified
packing cubes
will make it a little easier.
Cash, passports, documents - keep it all together with this
neat multi-zip from Smythson
.
We all gawk over the stunning destinations James Bond gets to visit on “work trips”. Live vicariously from within your office cubicle with this
new coffee table book
.
Need to keep your investigative skills sharp over the holiday break?
The Mole card game
fits the bill perfectly!
🤓
For someone on their way to one of the above-mentioned careers… aka the
International Relations
student:
We all need our caffeine fix, and students probably a bit more than others. Keep the student in your life going with a
Club Pret
subscription.
White sneakers are today’s everything shoe, from city trekking to parties. Get these Autry
kicks
to elevate the look.
Who doesn’t love a thrilling board game and a quiet night in (every now and again that is…)? We just added this
Corridors of Power
game to our cart, and so should you.
Will they remember to use that umbrella? Of course not. So try giving them this
waxed baseball cap
instead.
For long nights at the library, or blocking out a snoring roommate. Credit: Apple
We’ve all been known to leave our backpacks behind… make sure that student in your life can get it back again with
Apple Air Tags
.
And keeping with the Apple trend, all the cool kids are wearing these over-ear
Apple headphones
.
Long nights reading endless PDFs on computer screens calls for a little eye protection, which these
blue light glasses
can help deliver.
Is someone in your life an avid reader looking for the ultimate personal library flex? Help them get there with this personalised
book embosser
.
➕
And finally, these excellent magazine subscriptions that will work for anyone!
National Geographic / Nat Geo History
London Review of Books
History Today
Time
The New Yorker
Delayed Gratification
We do hope you enjoy this change from our regular programming, and encourage you to share with friends, colleagues, or your mom if you want good pressies this year!