URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/reduced-size-template-ec1cf487515bf4e3
Title: 🌍 Did Milei just pull off a miracle?

Today’s briefing:
— Did Milei just pull off a miracle?
— World’s most mysterious noodles
— Mother Nature gifts us a meme
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Our British Intriguers will be familiar with the name Hiroshi Suzuki, Japan’s formidable ambassador to the Court of St James’s.
He’s been a social media star for a while now, as he roams the Kingdom with his trademark bouffant, sampling haggis, chugging ale, or belting out the Welsh anthem. Honestly, at this point the guy could tie his laces and still go viral. Even the BBC just pumped out a breathless article on the fact he ate a stew in Liverpool over the weekend.
So embassies the world over will be puzzling over how to replicate his success.
But here’s my (very!) humble two pence — in addition to the ambassador’s earnest charm, there’s also his timing: he’s serving in the UK right as the nation increasingly doubts itself.
And so for another major power’s ambassador to be there, thumbs up, telling Brits their traditions, their ales, heck, even their food… it’s good stuff to be proud of? Uffff.
Anyway, let’s tell you about
President Milei’s massive weekend win in Argentina
.
Report of the day
‘Stabilizing the US-China Rivalry’
That’s the name of
the report
just published by US thinktank RAND, now generating a heated and nerdy debate over both its
recommendations
(like urging the US to stop aiming for a decisive ‘victory’ over China), and its
criticisms
(like arguing Western officials are mis-translating and over-dramatizing Beijing’s speeches to exaggerate the threat).
Argentina’s big surprise
The world doesn't ordinarily hold its breath for Argentina's mid-terms, but President Milei’s massive performance over the weekend had all those sweet sweet ingredients the headlines love: high stakes, tight margins, big egos, all culminating in… a plot twist.
So let's take a quick look at what Sunday's result means, and why it matters:
First, the stakes
Technically
, voters were renewing half the lower house, and a third of the senate.
But
practically
, this was a referendum on Milei's austerity shock therapy to
a
) curb inflation,
b
) stabilise Argentina’s economy, and
c
) finally end its endless default cycle.
And so
politically
, his surprise 41% result is not just a boost (polls said he'd be lucky at 35%), but this also makes it much harder for the opposition to block Milei's reforms.
Which reforms, you ask?
His '
phase 1
' already delivered Argentina's first full-year surplus in 123 years and crushed monthly inflation from ~25% to ~2%, all by slashing things Argentina can't really afford (subsidies, costly public works, and a big public sector). And while poverty is still high, the latest stats show it’s falling (though critics argue the numbers cloud a complex picture).
His planned '
phase 2
' reforms will be just as big and polarising, whether deregulating the labour market, simplifying the tax code, or privatising another ~20 state-owned firms.
And yet voters just gave Milei the green light (a ~veto-proof presence), which takes us to…
Second, the margins
It's one thing for
polls
to project
a razor-thin result
, but when
markets
predict it? Ufff.
Yet that’s what played out lately, as traders saw
a
) stubborn poverty,
b
) big protests,
c
) Milei’s poor provincial result, and
d
) scandals (like alleged kickbacks involving his own sister/chief-of-staff), and concluded maybe Argentines were finally fed up with him.
That’s why in recent months, a spooked market went running on the peso, and forced the central bank to burn reserves to defend it, all while edging Argentina closer to default.
Which gets us to...
Third, the egos
President Trump then shocked everyone earlier this month with
a ~$20B currency swap
(plus another possible $20B private facility). It didn’t fix Argentina's problems, but it gave the central bank enough breathing room to avoid a pre-election collapse that would’ve wiped Milei at the ballot.
So this was a circuit-breaker to stop the market’s prophecy from self-fulfilling.
And it arguably worked.
So… that sound you can hear? It’s a sigh of relief as Argentina’s peso, bonds, and stocks all bounce back after a rough few months. It’s a regional sigh, too — even neighbouring Brazil’s currency is up on the news, as fellow emerging markets get a kind of halo effect.
Intrigue’s Take
The
signal
in amongst all the noise here is that folks in Argentina are still willing to endure more pain to avoid their country’s 10th default since 1816 (or fourth since 2001).
The alternative — a sudden halt, midway through a historic reform program — might’ve been the worst of both worlds: pain without the payoff.
But to be clear, months of declining approvals are also
a reminder
that this big result is hardly a blank cheque for Milei: voters also want their side-burned, leather-clad, rock-belting economist of a leader to cut the scandals, ease the burden on the poorest, and maybe stop calling student protestors “
terrorists
” while he's at it.
We just wonder if he can hear that message over the roar of his own celebrations.
Sound smarter
:
Milei has almost tripled his seats and beat the opposition Peronists by ~10%, but (based on pre-existing seats) the weakened Peronists still hold more seats.
Turnout came in at a relatively low 68%.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇨🇳
CHINA — He said, Xi said.
US and Chinese officials are saying they’re close to a trade deal, with Presidents Trump and Xi potentially finalising it in South Korea later this week. Treasury Secretary Bessent says the deal includes Beijing both a) resuming its US soybean purchases, and b) delaying its rare earth export controls for a year. (
BBC
)
Comment:
We
wrote
about China’s rare earths chokehold last week. Anyway, if this is where the US-China deal lands for now, it’s basically what we foreshadowed months ago: some big transactional headlines, but nothing that fundamentally re-balances China’s economy with the rest of the world. Interestingly, Secretary of State Rubio has also said the deal won’t include the US abandoning its long-standing support for democratic Taiwan, but the fact this even needs saying is wild.
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES — Not so fast.
Responding to last week’s
claims
that a recent record 5,700 aspiring diplomats just applied to join the US State Department, the nonpartisan
American Foreign Service Association
has pointed out that there were more applicants as recently as 2021. (
AFSA
)
🇷🇺
RUSSIA — New missile, who dis?
Putin tested his new nuclear-propelled Burevestnik cruise missile over the weekend, with claims it flew a distance of 14,000km (8,700mi) for 15 hours. (
CNN
)
Comment:
Tell us you’re desperate without telling us you’re desperate, Vlad. His test comes days after the US and UK imposed big new sanctions on Russian oil companies.
🇩🇪
GERMANY  — Fine, I didn’t even want to go.
Foreign Minister Wadephul has delayed his trip to China after Beijing reportedly only approved
one
meeting. Interestingly, he’s using the time to instead do pretty much the opposite of visiting China: meeting NATO boss Mark Rutte and rival India’s trade lead Piyush Goyal in Brussels today (Monday). (
The Straits Times
)
Comment:
German outlets were quick to run with the headline that “no one wants to meet Wadephul”, but it looks more to us like China’s classic diplomatic deep freeze when you’ve done something Beijing dislikes — since taking the job in May, Wadephul has criticised China’s support for Russia, and its aggression in the South China Sea.
🇹🇱
TIMOR-LESTE
— You’re in.
Southeast Asia’s ASEAN bloc has formally admitted its first new member since the 1990s, more than a decade after Timor-Leste first lodged its application. Dili now gets much-needed access to ASEAN’s $3.8T economy. (
AP
)
Comment
: It’s a procedural thing, but has still been the main news out of ASEAN’s Malaysia summit so far (it wraps Tuesday), other than President Trump witnessing the Thailand-Cambodia peace accords. This is the first time a US president has attended ASEAN since 2022, and
research
out of Singapore suggests it’s timely: most nations in the region now seem to be leaning more towards China.
🇧🇷
BRAZIL — Anotha’ one
President Lula da Silva (who turns 80 today) has announced he’ll seek re-election to his fourth term next year. Brazilian leaders don’t have a term limit, but can’t serve for more than two consecutive terms at a time. (
Folha
)
Comment
: His popularity is well below the 80% he hit during his first stint, but he’s still one of the region’s most popular presidents, and polls are struggling to find any rivals capable of beating him (particularly with Bolsonaro now in jail).
🇳🇬
NIGERIA — Shuffle.
President Tinubu has appointed new service chiefs in a sweeping military overhaul amid Islamist insurgencies in the northeast and separatism in the southeast. (
Arise News
)
Comment
: The shuffle also comes a week after local outlets reported on a foiled coup plot — officials are denying it ever happened, though the military did arrest 16 officers on vague “indiscipline” charges earlier this month.
Extra Intrigue
🤣
Your roundup of the world’s lighter news
Police in Spain have arrested seven people suspected of
stealing 1,000 chairs
from restaurants and bars.
A man caught breaking into an empty house in Japan has denied being responsible for the
udon noodles found in its refrigerator
.
A Texas college is banning its students from
throwing celebratory tortillas
at the start of football games.
Last week’s Amazon cloud outage apparently
caused smart mattresses to overheat
.
And sneaker brand ‘On’ is getting sued by customers complaining of an
embarrassingly loud squeak
coming from their kicks.
Photo of the day
Credits: Warren Price/Comedy Wildlife Photography Awards. (Intrigue added the meme)
There’s no better way to tackle Monday-itis than by
browsing the finalists
of this year’s Comedy Wildlife Photography Awards, including the above cracker by the UK’s Warren Price. He snapped it off Norway’s Hornøya as two guillemots squabbled for nesting space.
The big winners will be announced in London on December 9th, all part of trying to encourage more wildlife conservation around the world.
Today’s poll
Do you think Western officials are over-dramatising the China threat?
💥 Yes, it wins votes
🦅 No, they're still too cautious
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Last Thursday’s poll:
Who do you think will be winning the space race in 2040?
🇺🇸
US (40%)
🇨🇳
China (50%)
🇯🇵
Japan (2%)
🇪🇺
Europe (2%)
🇮🇳
India (3%)
🇷🇺
Russia (1%)
✍️ Other (write us!) (2%)
Your two cents:
🇨🇳
I:
“China has the drive and expertise. They also plan decades in advance which is something the USA refuses to do.”
🇺🇸
D.G:
“The US has so many companies competing to be #1 right now that they will continue to rule space. Competition breeds winners.”
✍️
S.M:
“Private organisations like SpaceX will dominate the field. The space race is no longer just a national competition.”
✍️
J.M:
“None. Other geopolitical events will receive more urgent attention. The Space Race will be a political and power flexing strategy instead of a tangible plan.”