URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/did-this-ship-just-re-write-the-future
Title: 🌍 Did this ship just re-write the future?

Today’s briefing:
— Did this ship just re-write the future?
— A 99-year-old world leader…
— Why Albert Hall needed new toilets
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Every foreign policy nerd has a few geopolitics topics up their sleeve to whip out at dinner parties. My top three are 1) the Mongol Empire’s contributions to diplomacy, 2) the impact of AI on humanity, and 3) the Arctic trade route.
At one point in my grad school studies, I was so serious about becoming an expert on the impact of warming sea waters and climate change on the Arctic trade route that I signed up for a fellowship in Greenland and became a contributor to Arctic Today.
Sadly the pandemic put a kibosh to those plans, and I instead pivoted into writing a geopolitical newsletter on Substack… Anyway,
the Arctic trade route
issue is still very much live, and we’ll dive into that in our top story today.
Number of the day
900,000
That’s how much Japan’s population declined last year, its biggest drop on record.
Frozen
HOLD THE FRONT PAGE EVERYBODY… a container ship just reached its destination!!
Okay, um, that actually doesn’t sound so exciting in retrospect, unless you’re talking about the China-operated and Liberia-flagged
Istanbul Bridge
, which just became the first container ship to travel from China to Europe via Earth’s new Arctic Express route.
Here are three reasons you should care about this Arctic route:
It’s faster
This ship only left China’s eastern Zhejiang province on 23 September, reaching its first European port (the UK’s Felixstowe)
barely 20 days
later. So we’re talking
half
the time the Suez Canal takes, and a fraction of the Cape of Good Hope’s 50-day slog.
That means this new Arctic route is now comparable to the ~25 days a China-Europe
rail
link takes, but those speedy rail options cost
twice
as much as on-water shipping.
And speaking of costs, slashing these shipping times of course means
lower costs
via savings around fuel, labour, maintenance, insurance, and security (no Arctic pirates yet).
Speaking of pirates…
It’s cooler
Okay not in the
😎
sense, but in the sense it’s easier to keep your cargo temperatures low via the Arctic, particularly during the summer. That makes it ideal not just for time-critical goods like those fresh Ningxia goji berries you smugly tossed in your morning smoothie after a mid run, but also
temperature
-sensitive cargo like certain semiconductors.
And speaking of semiconductors…
It’s strategic
China has long tried to develop what it calls the ‘
Polar Silk Road
’, despite not having any Arctic turf. In fact, China is 1,500km / 900mi away from the Arctic (like Mexico City to Houston), but describes itself as a ‘near-Arctic state’, which we can confirm is not a thing.
So why such a big Arctic focus?
Sure, it’s partly the above
trade
angle: China is by far the world’s top exporter. It’s also about
resources
: the Arctic has maybe 25% of the world’s oil and gas.
But it’s also really about
strategy
, in two ways:
first
, it’s about establishing a presence in a region that is itself strategically sensitive in the way it lets you encircle rivals from above.
But
second
, it’s also about allaying China’s own fears of
encirclement
. For example, China gets 70% of its energy imports via the narrow Malacca Straits between Indonesia, Malaysia, and Singapore, which is why the US navy will blockade those waters in any war.
Meanwhile, the Arctic route means passing through the waters of
Putin’s Russia
, which is not only Beijing-friendly right now, but Beijing-
dependent
. And lest there be any doubt, the two neighbours recently
finalised a deal
to jointly develop Arctic commercial routes.
So is this the advent of Arctic shipping?
Well, yes and no.
You’ll note we casually described this Arctic route as ‘
new
’, which implies shiny and exciting, but it’s obviously just ‘new’ because the Arctic is warming four times faster than the rest of the planet. So it’s a bit like announcing a ‘new’ rash. But that’s our reality, and China’s
Sea Legend Line
is already pledging regular service from next summer.
And that brings us to
the iceberg-sized ‘but’
: China’s state media conveniently
left out
that most ships will still need an icebreaker escort, even in September when sea ice is at its lowest! The routes will be fully closed during winter, and freight rates will be high at first, so the Arctic still doesn’t look large-scale viable right now.
So maybe don’t go doubling down on your goji berry smoothies just yet.
Intrigue’s Take
Intriguers will already know we’re hurtling into a low-trust, high-tension era that’ll make the last three decades seem like an episode of
Ted Lasso
(or for any 1990s kids out there, maybe an episode of
7th Heaven
or
Full House
).
So we naturally spend a lot of time exploring how
our new age of competition
is already playing out across every dimension, from tech and resources to space and cyberspace.
But the unusual thing about this Arctic route story is the way it stems from
fundamental changes in our geography
. There are historians like Stanford’s Ian Morris who’ve built entire careers arguing that
geography is destiny
. That’s even the name of his latest book, exploring how the rising waters that separated the British Isles from continental Europe 10,000 years ago might’ve put the UK on its eventual path to global domination.
There are of course
loads of other drivers
here, way too nuanced to cavalierly cram into a single parenthetical (culture, institutions, theology, philosophy, sorry), but geography matters. So to have a major geographic shift like the one playing out in the Arctic? It’s big.
Recent history even offers
examples of just how big
, whether Ethiopia’s new dam on the Nile (triggering a spat with Egypt), Russia’s near-draining of the Aral Sea (triggering Uzbek-Kazakh spats), the massive shrinking of Lake Chad (triggering wars among Chad, Nigeria, Niger, and Cameroon), or mankind’s own Panama and Suez Canals, which helped accelerate not only globalisation, but also US naval dominance.
So this new Arctic route could end up forcing us to navigate more than just new waters.
Sound even smarter:
Arctic shipping has already
more than doubled
(in terms of distance travelled) over the past decade.
An
August study
found there’s been a dramatic
slowdown
in Arctic ice melting over the past 20 years. The researchers argue it’s likely a temporary reprieve caused by natural oceanic variations, rather than any kind of longer-term reversal.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇩🇪
GERMANY
-
Changing tides
.
China overtook the US as Germany’s biggest trade partner in the first eight months of the year, primarily due to biting US tariffs on European goods. (
Reuters
)
Comment
: The US had only just overtaken China as Germany’s top partner, as China raced up the value chain to produce things (like cars) it used to buy from Germany. The list of economies caught between China’s over-capacity and America’s tariffs will just get longer.
🇨🇲
CAMEROON
-
Election chaos
.
The electoral commission has declared incumbent Paul Biya (92) the provisional winner of last week’s presidential elections, with security forces now using tear gas to disperse protestors angry at the world’s oldest leader lining up his eighth term. Assuming this gets ratified, he’ll be 99 when his next term ends. (
AfricaNews
)
Comment
: He’s been ruling Cameroon since 1982, doctoring the occasional election along the way, so this result was never really in doubt. The doubt is more around what happens now: Biya’s candidacy irritated key allies, and while his opponent (Tchiroma) is no spring chicken at 76, he still managed to unite a tired opposition, and claimed victory last week. Cameroon is a major cocoa exporter, so keep an eye on prices.
🇰🇷
SOUTH KOREA
-
Off the hook
.
A South Korean court has acquitted the founder of popular local messaging app Kakao of stock manipulation charges tied to a takeover battle for a K-pop firm. (
Bloomberg
)
Comment:
In the immediate term, this verdict clears the billionaire (Brian Kim) to rebuild his tech empire and regain investor confidence. But for Korea’s broader economy, it’s a signal that maybe you don’t have to be a chaebol (Korea’s massive, dominant, family-controlled conglomerates) to thrive.
🇦🇹
AUSTRIA
-
Sent back
.
Austria has deported its first Afghan national (with criminal convictions) since the Taliban’s 2021 return to Kabul, dismissing safety concerns. Vienna was also recently Europe’s first to deport a Syrian national since Syria’s civil war. (
Kabul Now
)
Comment:
Afghanistan and Syria are the top two sources of asylum seekers in Austria. With both wars now ostensibly over, and immigration-sceptic parties gaining ground in Austria and elsewhere, this trend will accelerate.
🇦🇺
AUSTRALIA
-
Stop that
.
Canberra and Beijing are again trading accusations after their latest military encounter in the South China Sea, with Australia’s defence minister criticising China’s “
unsafe and unprofessional
” release of flares near an Australian surveillance plane. For its part, Beijing claims Australia “
intruded
” into China’s airspace. (
ABC
)
Comment:
Australia’s
statement
didn’t specify the exact location, beyond noting it was international airspace. China’s
statement
, meanwhile, argued it occurred within China’s ‘Xisha’ airspace — ie, the Paracel Islands, which are roughly equidistant between (and claimed by) China and Vietnam, but China has controlled them since ousting South Vietnamese forces in 1974.
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
School’s out.
More than 270 schools in the unincorporated US territory of Puerto Rico have shorter schedules this week, after a major water pipe broke on Sunday, leaving 165,000 folks across 15 cities (including San Juan) facing shortages. (
AP
)
Comment:
The timing could’ve been worse: local megastar Bad Bunny only just wrapped his three-month / 30-concert residency on the island, single-handedly delivering a much-needed $200M tourism sugar hit.
🇸🇩
SUDAN
-
Change of plans.
The international airport in Sudan’s capital of Khartoum was set to re-open today (Wednesday), though a presumed drone attack by the notorious RSF paramilitary might’ve just delayed the idea. There’s been
relative
calm since the army retook Khartoum from the RSF in March. (
BBC
)
Extra Intrigue
The Intrigue jobs board
💼
Junior China Analyst @
Association for International Affairs
in Prague
Humanitarian Advocacy Advisor, UN
@
Save the Children
in NYC or Geneva
Stanton Nuclear Security Fellowship
@
CFR
in Washington, D.C.
Tourism Partnerships Coordinator
@
National Museum, Australia
in Canberra
Competition of the day
The sumo wrestlers did some sightseeing while in the UK. Credits: @TheSumoSoul via X.
After a 30-year hiatus, Japanese sumo wrestling just stomped back into London’s Royal Albert Hall over the weekend. For five earth-shaking days, 40 of Japan’s top rikishi (sumo wrestlers) turned one of Britain’s most elegant concert halls into a dohyō (sumo ring).
Some fun facts reported by local outlets: the wrestlers collectively ate 70kg (155lb) of rice each day, and punished more than 400 bottles of soy sauce. And lest you think we’re high-brow here at Intrigue, Albert Hall apparently had to get its backstage toilets reinforced too.
Today’s poll
Who do you think wins most from this new Arctic shipping route?
🇨🇳 China
🇷🇺 Russia
🇺🇸 The US
🇪🇺 Europe
✍️ Other (write us!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think this US-Aus deal will help break China's control over rare earths?
💵
Yes, especially with price controls (52%)
📟 No, the technology is still lagging (46%)
✍️ Other (write us!) (2%)
Your two cents:
💵
S.K:
“The US has wanted more alternatives to Chinese rare earth minerals and chips for a long while, and there's no doubt Australia has been made nervous by China believing they're supposed to be the new global hegemon. We shouldn't underestimate how much both countries are going to pour into making this work. It's a matter of national security!”
📟
J.E:
“It could help, but overall, it takes ~15 years even to finish one of these mines. China already has the stronghold.”
✍️ G.M:
“No, it is a stop gap measure at best.”