URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/did-china-just-laser-germany-34e4420bfd91c6e9
Title: 🌍 Did China just laser Germany?

Today’s briefing:
— Did China just laser Germany?
— A crackdown on crypto
— An imperial solo
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Before we get into today’s
surprising new intrigue in the Red Sea
(spoiler: someone got lasered), allow me to casually shoe-horn some Red Sea fun-facts into this intro via three quick numbers:
Zero
: that’s how many permanent rivers flow into the Red Sea, hence its high salinity and unique ecosystem, including….
8cm
(3.1in): that’s the size of the Red Sea’s
mimic blenny
, a funny lil’ fish who survives by mimicking other creatures, while…
Eight
: that’s how many nations border the Red Sea. And while they’ve had their fair share of conflict over the millennia, it’s actually two very distant lands (Germany and China) now coming to blows in the region. Let’s see why.
PS
— In just a few hours, we’ll be chatting with
Dr Casey Handmer
, the engineer and Intriguer now making fuel from thin air! It’s online, noon ET
today
(Thurs) —
join here
!
Number of the day
$4 trillion
That’s how much US-based chipmaker Nvidia was briefly worth on Wednesday, the first listed firm in history to break the $4T mark (it was at $3T just last month).
Lasers in the Red Sea
Just when you thought the Red Sea probably had enough drama, two surprise cast members make a shock cameo, triggering a whole new side-plot.
That’s because Berlin just accused China of
aiming a laser
at a German-operated surveillance plane in the
EU’s
Operation Aspides
.
What’s Aspides?
That’s the EU’s smaller, more defensive naval mission helping escort cargo ships through the Red Sea amid continued Houthi attacks
Oooh a laser, big deal?
It’s a provocative move that can temporarily blind or disorient pilots, risking a crash, miscalculation, or worse
So why now?
While it reportedly happened earlier this month, and the twin-prop later landed safely in Djibouti, Berlin went public on Tuesday after first giving China’s ambassador in Berlin a dressing-down over the
“entirely unacceptable”
act
So that’s the situation, but it raises
a few other interesting questions
.
First
, what are these two distant navies even doing in
the Red Sea
?
Like Germany, China has
a base in Djibouti
and has been deploying to the broader Middle East for years. It was initially about Somali pirates rather than Houthi rebels, but the basic justification was the same: global commerce can’t be held hostage by a few well-armed randoms.
Of course, the notion of a rapidly militarising China establishing its first offshore military base
rattled some
, while its 90-acre site (with an underground footprint the size of Buckingham Palace) is known to harbour some big intelligence-gathering capabilities.
But China isn’t exactly alone: in fact, Djibouti now hosts bases from
eight
nations, including the US, France, Japan, Italy, Spain and the Saudis. Which leads us to…
Second, why’s everyone want a base in Djibouti?
Well, it sits right on the Bab el-Mandeb Strait, which is the most narrow chokepoint (29km / 18 mi across) for tankers and cargo ships trying to exit the Red Sea out into global markets. And…
Third, why’s Djibouti want to host everyone’s bases?
The tiny nation of 1.2 million people sees these bases as a critical source of rental payments, infrastructure investment, jobs, and security in a volatile region.
So then
fourth
, what’s the underlying significance of this whole Germany-China laser story? It really reflects
a pattern
about hybrid warfare broadly, and China specifically.
While
China
has consistently
denied
or countered several similar laser accusations over the years (from the US, the Philippines, and Australia), the list keeps getting longer.
And more broadly, whether the world sees incendiary devices in cargo, weaponised migration, cyberattacks on infrastructure, jamming GPS, sabotaging cables, spontaneously exploding tankers, or water-cannoning sailors,
hybrid tactics
are becoming the new norm — it’s about sewing panic without pushback in order to impose costs and test responses.
Intrigue’s Take
The same things that make hybrid warfare appealing (
incremental, deniable
) also make it tricky: just by speaking up about it, you can look petty if not soft or conspiratorial.
So…
how to respond?
Germany’s answer is one model: keep the immediate focus on safety, raise the incident through formal channels (Merz likely flagged it with Wang Yi), then go public when you hit the wall.
And that’s
kinda
how
the punishment matches the crime
: capitals can shrug off any individual moment, though collectively they become an irritant if not yet a deterrent.
And that, in turn, is a reminder of where our world is at: as the old order breaks down, more powers will try throwing their weight around like this. And so part of the answer might be to preserve whatever unity and order you can to push back.
But that’s also where our world’s emerging
double-speak
enters the chat: in one breath, Merz calls China out for this laser incident, then apparently reveals he’s looking forward to his first official trip to China (a top trade partner) later this year. And ditto, the US and Europe keep nodding at their security ties, while a painful trade war festers away.
It all reminds us of how a legendary Singaporean diplomat (Bilahari) once described our new world: increasingly ‘
omni-directional
’. Do and say what you need, when you need.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
Percent
Hedge Against Stock Market Uncertainty with Private Credit
Private credit is an alternative that may provide stability during times of volatility. On Percent’s platform, private credit investments delivered
average net returns of 14.9% in 2024
, with many deals offering shorter durations and monthly income potential.
While past performance doesn't guarantee future results, private credit may offer a path to diversification when equity markets feel overvalued.
Historically Resilient in Market Downturns
Short-Term Flexibility
Monthly Interest Payments
Low Minimums for Access
Join Percent today
and diversify with confidence—up to $500 bonus on your first investment
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
Et tu, Brazil?
President Trump has fired off seven more trade letters, including one to Brazil’s President Lula imposing
50% tariffs
from August over Brazil’s approach to US social media companies, plus the ongoing trial of former leader Jair Bolsonaro. Separately, Trump’s global 50% copper tariffs also now kick in from 1 August. (
Rio Times
)
🇾🇪
YEMEN
-
Houthis sink second ship in a week.
Houthi drones have sunk a Liberian-flagged cargo ship crossing the Red Sea, leaving at least three crew members dead. The Houthis say they targeted the
Eternity C
over its links to Israel. (
AP
)
Comment
: After almost two years of withstanding various military responses, the Houthis can still make the world question the viability of this critical waterway. Supply chains and insurance premiums will increasingly now just price it all in.
🇦🇫
AFGHANISTAN
-
The
ICC wants the Taliban.
The International Criminal Court has issued arrest warrants for two top Taliban officials, holding them criminally responsible for the regime’s treatment of women and girls. Since its 2021 return, the Islamist group has banned girls from education past the sixth grade, and has effectively banned women from public spaces. (
CNN
)
🇪🇺
EUROPEAN UNION
-
What’ve you done for me lately?
Barely seven months into her second term as Commission President, Ursula von der Leyen now faces a confidence vote in the European Parliament today (Thursday). She should survive, but a bad showing could still dent her leadership. (
Politico
)
🇭🇹
HAITI
-
You can check out, but never leave.
The gangs now controlling most of Haiti’s capital just burned down the country’s beloved Hotel Oloffson, which has famously housed celebs like Mick Jagger and once inspired Graham Greene’s novel
The Comedians
. (
Guardian
)
Comment
: The hotel was in an area being targeted by one of the city’s resurgent gangs. Whatever the specifics, it’s a vivid illustration of how the Kenya-led peacekeeping mission is still on struggle street, with Haiti’s beleaguered administration now reportedly leaning more on private mercenaries.
🇸🇸
SOUTH SUDAN
-
You’re fired.
President Kiir has dismissed his army chief, seven months after appointing him. Kiir has offered no explanation, though the young country is grappling with renewed instability as an ethnic armed group clashes with the military. (
AfricaNews
)
🇳🇿
NEW ZEALAND
-
Crypto crackdown.
Wellington is planning to ban crypto ATMs and put a $5k limit on international cash transfers, in an effort to clamp down on money laundering. (
The Block
)
Extra Intrigue
In other worlds…
Science
: Researchers have 3D printed a
10-micrometre-long elephant
inside a living cell. We were not expecting to type that particular sentence.
Sports
: The Red Bull F1 team has
sacked long-time principal
Christian Horner after a string of disappointing results and scandals.
History
: Archaeologists have uncovered a
3,500-year-old lost city in Peru
, shedding new light on a civilisation that was contemporary to ancient Egypt.
From our sponsors
Love to Learn? Here’s One Skill That Opens Doors.
If you're someone who always wants to know more, learning a new language is one of the most rewarding skills out there.
Babbel’s lessons are short, practical, and surprisingly addictive. In just 10 minutes a day, you’ll be building confidence in real-world conversations and opening up a whole new way to experience the world. Because learning doesn’t stop after school.
Feed Your Curiosity – Save 55%
Gig of the day
Japan’s Emperor Naruhito with the Mongolian State Morin Khuur Symphony Orchestra.
You might’ve thought royals just smile, wave, and/or cut ribbons. But we’re here to confirm that, at least in Japan, they also bust out epic viola solos. Emperor Naruhito treated local audiences to a couple of tunes during his time in Ulaanbaatar this week.
We like to think that, just out of frame, everyone’s got their lighters out.
Today’s poll
Which music genre do you think has had the biggest impact around the world?
🎺 Jazz
👯 K-pop
🎵 Afrobeats
🪘 Reggae
🎤 Hip-hop
💃 Cumbia
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
How do you feel about Amazon's impact on the world?
📦 It's great! (19%)
😳
Eh, but at what cost (80%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (1%)
Your two cents:
😳
F.G:
“I'd argue they've done a ton of damage to the environment, society, and labor. Yes, I am also Amazon Web Services certified, why do you ask?”
📦
D:
“The monopoly is not good, but Amazon’s ability to be an online one-stop shop is the key innovation.”
✍️
T.K:
“It's inculcated. Love it or hate it, it's here, you use it, kinda need to, and it's likely not going away!”