URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/did-trump-make-the-right-call-640b54f01887834a
Title: 🌍 Did Trump make the right call?

Today’s briefing:
— Did Trump make the right call?
— AI for me, not for thee
— Your favourite drink is changing
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. So, who saw
that
coming? There was nothing in the oil or even betting markets to hint that President Trump might make a move.
But you know who
did
see these US strikes coming? Apparently, you did. In last week’s polling, 62% of Intriguers assessed President Trump would pull the trigger. And maybe that foresight isn’t surprising, given this community includes so many folks in the know.
Anyway, let’s get you up to speed on
what’s next for Iran, Israel, and the US.
Number of the day
9,000
That’s how many light-years into our universe Chile’s new Vera C Rubin observatory can now photograph.
The US hits Iran
With the US now hitting Iran directly for the first time, we're all left with two big questions.
First, was this the right call?
Backers
argue the ayatollah runs a fascist, expansionist regime openly calling for Israel’s destruction and sponsoring like-minded terrorist groups, all while stringing a naïve world along with talks, yet still stockpiling uranium enriched to 60% (way beyond the 3-5% you need for civilian use). So the US president has now hit Iran’s nuclear program, avoided any US boots on the ground, and restored US deterrence in the process.
What’s not to like?
Ah, well
critics
argue he’s violated laws, ignored sanguine US intelligence, revealed a double standard on Israel's own nuclear program, and breached his own pledge to avoid wars, yet might've now
a
) vindicated if not accelerated whatever's left of Iran's nuclear program,
b
) incentivised more attacks on US interests, and
c
) undermined US credibility — why do a deal if a later US president might withdraw then bomb you?
But you know what? History's answer to all this might ultimately depend on...
Second, what happens next?
US messaging has effectively been '
no backsies
' — ie, we're done here, unless you try us.
But Iran is sending mixed signals across its military, nuclear, and economic fronts:
In terms of any
military response
, regime officials are telling Western outlets they’ll limit any retaliation to further (dwindling) strikes on Israel, but there are also claims Iran might
Activate
sleeper
cells abroad (though that might just vindicate these US strikes)
Activate Iranian
proxies
in the Middle East (though they're now so weak), and/or
Pull a repeat of Tehran's response to Trump's
2020
hit on General Soleimani (ie, telegraph a symbolic response to avoid any actual US harm or escalation).
Then on Iran's
nuclear
program, Tehran claims this is barely a flesh wound, arguing
a
) it already relocated nuclear material (initial intel agrees), and
b
) it’s already rebuilding "
with even greater strength
". I.e., you can flatten buildings, collapse bunkers, and even shatter centrifuges, but that's not the same as reversing a long-term determination to go nuclear.
And finally on the
economic front
, Iran's parliament is floating the idea of blocking the Strait of Hormuz, but that's really up to Iran's leader. And he'll note that, while threatening ~5% of America's oil supply, this would really screw both
a
) Iran’s friends (China gets 45% of its oil via Hormuz), and
b
) its neighbours: the Emiratis export 60% of their oil via Hormuz, while it's 88% for the Saudis, and pretty much 100% for the Iraqis, Qataris, and Kuwaitis.
So… what's Iran gonna do?
One driver is the fact that Israel's
assassinations
have seemingly targeted Iran's hardliners,
potentially
nudging Tehran’s remaining balance away from more escalation.
But yet another indicator is the
oil
price, which has remained surprisingly stable given everything we’ve just outlined above: that’s a bet we're not on the brink. At least, not yet.
Intrigue’s Take
So, how’s the rest of the world viewing this? While a couple of US allies have now openly backed these strikes, most are staying out of it (aka issuing vague calls for de-escalation).
As for US
rivals
? They’ve been remarkably unified, with Beijing, Moscow, Pyongyang, Havana, and Caracas all issuing spicy condemnations. Why? Marxist-Leninists, Putinists, Juchists, Communists, and Chavistas have little in common, but one thing they share with Iran’s theocrats is an ideological opposition to the US, or at least to US interventionism.
And there may be no more
potent demonstration
of continued American reach than this weekend’s display that a US president can still hit any target, at any time, and with tech mostly developed back when MacGyver was still on TV.
Sound even smarter:
Our exclusive
WhatsApp group
has included some interesting discussions on the legal debates around these US strikes. It’s free to join the conversation by referring five frolleagues to Intrigue using your unique referral link down below!
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
BOXABL
Why 50,000+ Investors Are Backing BOXABL's Vision
You may have heard about
BOXABL
and their mission to revolutionize the outdated construction industry. BOXABL homes are manufactured in our Las Vegas factory, folded for transport, and then unfolded on-site in just an hour.
Here's a quick recap of why we believe
BOXABL
is poised for massive disruption:
Delivered a prototype order to
SpaceX
in 2020.
Project order for 156 homes from the
DoD
completed in 2021.
Built over 700 homes to date.
Actively delivering to both developers and individual consumers.
Reserved the
Nasdaq ticker symbol $BXBL
!
Raised over
$200 million
from over 50,000 investors since 2020.
BOXABL’s crowdfunding round,
at just $0.80 per share,
will close on June 24th.
Invest in BOXABL Today
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇳🇱
NETHERLANDS
-
NATO agrees on 5%.
Just ahead of NATO’s summit in The Hague this week, word is NATO leaders will endorse raising their defence spending targets to 5% of GDP. Spain’s leader only agreed after capitals added a bit of wriggle room to the language. (
Politico
)
Comment:
Now comes the hard part: walking the talk. NATO chief Mark Rutte says 2025 will be the first year all NATO members meet their old 2% target.
🇸🇾
SYRIA
-
Is ISIS back?
A suicide bomber has left 20 parishioners dead after an attack on a Greek Orthodox Church in Damascus. Syria blames ISIS, which hasn’t yet commented. (
France24
)
🇨🇴
COLOMBIA
-
Troops kidnapped (again).
Apparently following the orders of a Farc rebel offshoot, locals in the cocaine-producing Micay Canyon have reportedly kidnapped 57 Colombian troops. (
BBC
)
🇧🇾
BELARUS
-
Prisoners freed.
US Special Envoy Keith Kellogg appeared in Minsk over the weekend, securing the release of 14 political prisoners including a key opposition figure. (
Euractiv
)
Comment:
After stealing his seventh five-year term, maybe Lukashenko feels confident enough to release some of his critics. Or maybe with Western sanctions now really biting, he’s just willing to trade a few critics for some relief. Probably both.
🇸🇬
SINGAPORE
-
A bold first move.
Singapore’s Lawrence Wong has landed in China, where he’ll take part in this week’s World Economic Forum summer conference. (
Strait Times
)
Comment:
Long seen as a bellwether in ongoing US-China competition, DC will note that PM Wong chose Beijing as his first non-ASEAN visit since taking office in May. But we wouldn’t read
too
much into this just yet.
🇵🇦
PANAMA
-
No protests for you.
Protests against social security reforms have morphed into unrest, prompting Panama to temporarily suspend constitutional protections in one province. There’s been damage to the area’s main airport, as well as to Brazil-owned banana giant Chiquita Brands, which recently fired thousands of striking workers. (
AP
)
🇨🇩
DRC
-
Peace, but no cobalt.
The Democratic Republic of Congo has (again) extended its three-month ban on exporting cobalt (a critical tech input), citing a need to curb a recent price slump. Meanwhile, Kinshasa and neighbouring Rwanda have agreed to sign a US-brokered peace deal this Friday, aimed at ending decades of enmity. (
Bloomberg
$)
Extra Intrigue
🤣
Your weekly roundup of the world’s lighter news
A Hong Kong monkey has
torn apart a ‘
don’t feed the wildlife
’ sign
.
Kidnappers in France have
released a crypto-trader
after realising he’s broke.
Goldman Sachs is telling job-seekers
not to use AI
in the bank’s AI-run interviews.
A Michigan county has
overpaid one lucky employee to the tune of $1.6M
.
And New York police have had to
rescue (then charge) a photographer
after he broke into a defunct prison to take some edgy snaps
.
Perks with Intrigue
Drink of the day
Credits: Bon Appétit.
Yes, that’s a Negroni right there.
Just imagine it’s a blazing hot day (our US East Coast readers can relate rn) and you’re just sitting down for an ice cold drink, only to discover your gin takes a tad different. It’s a possibility, because it turns out juniper berries might be on the climate chopping block, as their taste can change as rain patterns evolve.
Key juniper-growing regions include the Balkans, the Himalayas, and parts of North America.
Today’s poll
How do you feel about the US strikes on Iran's nuclear sites?
👍 Worth it to stop Iran from getting nukes
👎 An unlawful response to a non-imminent threat
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Last Thursday’s poll:
Do you think regime change can ever work?
💪
Yes, if... (tell us!) (48%)
❌
No, because... (why?) (49%)
✍️ Other (write us!) (3%)
Your two cents:
❌
V.M:
“You can never control the local dynamics from afar.”
💪
T.W:
“Yes, but only if the population really wants it and if the new leader is in it for the country and not for themselves.”
✍️
Corrections corner
Thanks to those Intriguers who pointed out Friday’s briefing accidentally dropped the Argentina map pin on Brazil, and misspelled Australia’s bogong moth!
🤦