URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/india-assassinate-canadian-canada
Title: 🌍 Did India assassinate a Canadian in Canada?

Today’s newsletter supported by:
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Looking for something to
zhoosh
up
that tired living room of yours? Why not pop over to Paris, the style capital of the world, where they’re selling *
checks notes*
an enormous dinosaur skeleton nicknamed
‘Barry’
.
Today’s briefing is a 5 min read:
🇮🇳
-
🇨🇦
Did
India
assassinate a Canadian in
Canada
?
📱
Foxconn
hedges its bets (again).
➕
Plus:
Not mincing words on Ukraine, how the papers are covering US-China talks in Malta, and a new sport is trending in Botswana.
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇹🇼
Taiwan
: Authorities say they’ve detected a “
recent record
” of
100+ Chinese fighter jets
in 24 hours. Around half the jets crossed the Taiwan Strait’s median line, which had served as the unofficial divide until China’s air force began crossing it regularly last year.
🇱🇻
Latvia
: Evika Siliņahas has become the
new Latvian Prime Minister
after the previous government collapsed less than a year into its mandate. Hailing from the same centre-right party as her predecessor, Siliņahas heads a broad coalition with a slight majority.
🇲🇾
Malaysia
: Kuala Lumpur is aiming to
double its palm oil exports to China
to mitigate the effects of new EU environmental restrictions on the product. Malaysia is the world’s second-largest palm oil producer after Indonesia.
🇧🇷
Brazil
: The Supreme Court has sentenced a defendant to
17 years in jail
for his role in the storming of state institutions in Brasilia last January. The charges included armed criminal association, damage to historic buildings, and an attempted coup.
🇨🇬
Congo
: Brazzaville has
refuted online claims about a military coup
to remove long-serving President Denis Nguesso. The rumours emerged on social media while the president was in New York for the UN General Assembly.
🇨🇦
-
🇮🇳
Canada-India | Geopolitics
Prime Ministers Trudeau and Modi had a brief and blunt meeting at the G20
Did India assassinate a Canadian in Canada?
Canadian Prime Minister Trudeau
told parliament
yesterday (Monday) there were “
credible allegations of a potential link between agents of the government of India and the killing of a Canadian citizen, Hardeep Singh Nijjar
.”
Nijjar was a prominent Sikh separatist
who was shot dead outside a Vancouver-area temple in June. His killing remains unsolved, though Canadian authorities
said
last month they'd identified a getaway car.
Sikhism
is a religious minority making up 58% of the Indian state of Punjab, where a violent Sikh separatist movement erupted in the 1980s. India quashed the movement and has long labelled it a national security threat, but some voices (particularly abroad) still call for a separate Sikh state.
The largest Sikh community outside Punjab is actually in Canada
, a fact that’s long shaped India-Canada ties: India
accuses
Canada of not doing enough to quell Sikh separatism, while Canada
accuses
India of interference.
It all played out last week at the G20, where Prime Minister Modi
reiterated
India’s concerns, while Trudeau privately raised the allegation about Nijjar’s assassination. He’s now gone public with the claim, which India has
rejected
.
Intrigue’s take:
It’s worth just repeating the allegation here: that the world’s largest democracy and 2023 G20 host was involved in an extrajudicial and extraterritorial assassination of a Canadian citizen on Canadian soil.
You’d want to be confident going public with an explosive claim like this. We’ve not seen any evidence yet and, given it’s reportedly intel-sourced, we may never see conclusive evidence.
In the meantime, Trudeau has already briefed his US, UK, and French counterparts, who’ll now be reflecting on their own approach to India: the West has increasingly courted it as a way to balance China, but these allegations, true or not, will bolster those who’ve been urging caution.
Also worth noting:
The
US
and
Australia
have both said they’re “
deeply concerned
” by the allegations. The
UK
has said it’s in “
close touch
” with Canada.
India
designated
Mr Nijjar as a terrorist in 2020.
Air India flight 182 from Canada to India blew up off the Irish coast in 1985, killing all 329 people on board. A Sikh man acquitted over the bombing was
shot dead
in the same Vancouver region last year.
📰
How newspapers covered…
US-China talks in Malta
London, UK
“US and China officials meet in Malta ahead of possible Biden-Xi summit”
Beijing, China
“Wang Yi tells U.S. the Taiwan question remains 'No.1 red line'”
Taipei, Taiwan
“Wang Yi heads to Russia after US talks”
Wang Yi is China’s foreign minister
Today’s newsletter is supported by: Economist Education
How will the US-China rivalry shape technological development? Is globalisation in retreat? And how would this affect the global division of power?
Economist Education’s six-week international relations course explores the forces shifting the world order, and what this will mean for business, policy and people.
The online course features insights from
The Economist’s
journalists and invited experts, shared through specially crafted articles, infographics and videos. Through our interactive forums, participants can network with a global cohort of leaders to challenge their perspectives and apply learnings to new contexts.
Intrigue readers can enjoy 15% off this course by using the code ECON15INTRIGUE at checkout*.
Find out more
*Code expires October 31st 2023
📱
Taiwan | Tech
Foxconn hedges its bets (again)
Taiwanese tech giant Foxconn has announced plans to double its investment in India over the next year. A Foxconn exec made the announcement on
LinkedIn
while wishing Prime Minister Modi a happy 73rd birthday.
What’s behind Foxconn’s move?
🧲
Pull factors
-
India offers
incentives
and a large workforce
🔙
Push factors
-
Foxconn is China’s largest private employer and Apple’s largest iPhone manufacturer, so there’s value in hedging against political risk amidst deteriorating US-China ties, and
🕊️ Saving face
- There’s probably also some damage control at play, after Foxconn
ditched
a $19.5B Indian joint venture in July.
Intrigue's take:
As spooked governments take a more assertive approach to protecting their economies, business leaders are increasingly cosying-up to key decision-makers. And yes, sometimes that means swallowing your pride, logging onto LinkedIn, and sending a slightly cringe birthday message to a world leader (while promising billions in new investment).
Also worth noting:
Apple is hoping to manufacture
18% of its iPhones in India
by 2025, up from 7% in FY22-23.
Foxconn’s founder is currently
running for president
in Taiwan.
🎧 Today on
Intrigue Outloud
Why are so many world leaders missing from the UN?
Find out here!
➕
Extra Intrigue
Here’s what folks around the world are tweeting about:
🇧🇼
#SingaporeGP
is trending in
Botswana
, after a particularly
nail-biting Formula 1 race
.
🇫🇮
Finns
are tweeting about the
‘Kaivokatu’
area in Helsinki, which might be
closed to private cars
to improve the urban environment.
🇵🇰
The hashtag ‘
#SupremeCourtOfPakistan
’ is trending in Pakistan after the judicial body allowed the
live streaming of its proceedings
for the first time in history.
🗳️ Poll time!
It's been a year since Mahsa Amini's death triggered protests in Iran. Do you think those protests were successful?
👍 Yes, they reminded the regime of the power of the people
👎 No, everything is still pretty much the way it was before
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
💬
Quote of the day
Former US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton didn’t mince her words last night (Monday) on a panel in the margins of the UN General Assembly (UNGA).
Want to keep up to date with our UNGA coverage? Sign up
here
!
Yesterday’s poll:
Are you following the UN General Assembly this week?
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ❗ Yes, I'm attending! (5%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️
🔭
Yes, but from afar (36%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🥱
No, not really interested (54%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!) (5%)
Your two cents
:
❗
F.T:
“Despite the lack of specific objectives completed or likely to be completed, ongoing communication is better than none at all.”
✍️
R.L:
“I live in NYC, so I am paying attention by force.”