URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/does-this-us-ukraine-deal-change-anything-df543f7e13db22fd
Title: 🌍 Does this US-Ukraine deal change anything?

Today’s newsletter:
— Does this US-Ukraine deal change anything?
— CIA’s new recruitment video in China
— A very fishy quiz
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. It’s been a big week for Team Intrigue. Jeremy and I had the pleasure of speaking on the main stage of the Sunrise Festival about the future of our multipolar world, and the opportunities that exist for folks who can navigate the changes.
It was great to be able to share Intrigue’s story with the folks who were there, which included a colourful cast of entrepreneurs, funders, and creatives across industries.
One thing’s for sure - the impacts of geopolitics will come for us all, and that’s why we created Intrigue to help you navigate these changing times. And with that, let’s take you into the weekend with our briefing on
Ukraine’s latest deal with the US
.
The Trump-Zelensky rift
Our Wednesday briefing on Trump’s first 100 days had barely cannon-balled into your inbox when the White House dropped a surprise: the Ukraine minerals deal was done.
The broad idea first emerged in President Zelensky’s victory plan last October. Dropping just a couple of weeks before Americans went to the polls,
Zelensky’s strategy
was:
Keep your
allies
invested in Ukraine’s continued security, and
Curb
criticism
that backing Ukraine’s self-defence is too costly.
As Trump cruised to victory, Zelensky was appealing to his positioning as
a deal-maker
, dangling trillions in Ukrainian energy and metal resources as a way for the US to get a better deal without pulling the rug from under Ukraine’s future.
But Trump quickly took the deal in
a new direction
, framing it as back-pay for US assistance
already delivered
rather than any kind of forward-looking partnership. And meanwhile, Zelensky held tight to his insistence on
US security guarantees
— without an iron-clad US commitment to Ukraine’s security, Putin would just re-arm and re-invade.
This rift then collapsed into the
full meltdown
we all witnessed in the Oval Office. But now, two months and a St Peter’s Basilica pow-wow later, the two sides have signed.
So, what’s in the deal?
A 50/50 joint partnership
The US and Ukraine will have an equal stake and voting rights in a new
Reconstruction Investment Fund
(RIF), which aims to rebuild infrastructure once Putin’s war is over.
It’s up to the US what (if anything) it contributes to the fund — whether via financial or military assistance — though the deal flags an expectation that the US will contribute. Otherwise, it’s up to Kyiv to tip cash into the fund by diverting 50% of its revenues from any
new
extraction licenses (critical minerals, oil, and gas). Speaking of which…
Full Ukrainian control over own resources
This means Kyiv still owns its own riches, and decides where and what to extract. Likewise, Ukraine’s state-owned miners still remain state-owned and state-run. But it wasn’t all just about minerals…
Recognition of Ukraine’s EU ambition
Interestingly, the text makes clear this deal aims to avoid complicating Ukraine’s efforts to join the EU, and pledges to re-enter talks to fix any related issues if they arise.
But as always, it’s also worth looking at what’s
missing
from this document:
No repayment for past US military assistance
In what might’ve been a maximalist initial negotiating position, Trump’s first draft had called for full US control of Ukraine’s future resource revenues, financing a $500B back-payment for US military assistance (now totalling ~$115B). Speaking of which…
No transparency or corruption provisions
This is an interesting absence given Trump’s long-stated scepticism. Or… maybe it’s not that interesting if this deal is just a broad framework, or if the two sides have just agreed to rely on existing laws (which reflect years of US-Ukraine cooperation anyway). And…
No new US security guarantees
This is really the big absence — sure, the text says this deal “
strengthens the strategic partnership
” between the two nations, and pursues “
a peaceful, sovereign, and resilient Ukraine
”, but it still holds firm on Trump’s red line: no new security guarantees.
Intrigue’s Take
So this deal doesn’t
really
commit the US to anything, and it doesn’t
really
commit Ukraine to anything either (its existing resource sector continues unchanged).
Then…
what’s the point?
Sometimes you can see the point, not so much in the text, but in the
reactions
:
Trump
is declaring this a win, arguing it
a)
secures a return on US security investments,
b)
uses US projects to keep “
bad actors
” away, and
c)
is a result of his direct intervention (plus he’s now also approved his first arms sale to Ukraine)
Zelenksy
is likewise declaring this “
truly historic
”, emphasising it’s an equal
partnership
that respects Ukraine’s
sovereignty
and repairs Ukraine’s
US ties
As for
Russia?
There’s been no official word, though Russia suddenly ramped up its
attacks
, and Medvedev (a hawkish loyalist) has framed the deal as mere proof of US dominance over Ukraine — that framing reinforces domestic narratives that this ruinous war is somehow a necessary defence against Western encroachment.
So taking these reactions together? Even if this deal is light on the substance, it’s still an unwelcome step for Russia.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
BOXABL.
Could This Company Do for Housing What Tesla Did for Cars?
Most car factories like Ford or Tesla reportedly build one car per minute. Isn’t it time we do that for houses? BOXABL believes they have the potential to disrupt a massive and outdated trillion dollar building construction market.
Following an initial prototype order from SpaceX as well as an order for 156 homes from the DoD, BOXABL has made substantial strides in streamlining their assembly line automated manufacturing and order process. They just reserved the ticker symbol BXBL on Nasdaq*
BOXABL has raised over $170M from over 40,000 investors since 2020. To date, Boxabl raised over 50% of their Reg A+ funding limit! BOXABL is only accepting investment on their website until the Reg A+ is full.
Invest now
before it’s too late!
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇨🇳
CHINA - Beijing says it’s “
evaluating
” US talks.
China’s commerce ministry has issued a statement suggesting the US has been reaching out hoping to start talks, and that “
China is currently evaluating this
”. Markets rose on hopes this might herald a possible off-ramp. (
Bloomberg
$)
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES - Trump side-lines national security advisor.
Trump has moved Mike Waltz to the role of US ambassador to the UN, a month after Waltz set up the infamous Houthi attack group chat and included a journalist. (
Politico
)
Comment:
The interesting thing about giving Waltz the UN job is that it requires senate confirmation — you can bet it’ll now be a gruelling process. Oh, and we’ve crunched the numbers and can confirm Waltz lasted 9.18 Scaramuccis (using the 11-day Scaramucci scale)
.
🇰🇷
SOUTH KOREA - Shock resignations stun Koreans.
South Korea’s acting president just resigned to launch his own presidential bid, only for Korea’s next in line, the finance minister, to resign amid a new impeachment. That means the education minister is now Korea’s acting president. (
Yonhap
)
Comment
: Designated Survivor vibes, anyone? Anyway, it’s tricky timing for the Koreans, who are reportedly among the closest to minting the first post-Liberation Day trade deal with the US. A few more resignations back in Seoul, and Korea’s trade team in DC might end up president by the time they fly home.
🇷🇸
SERBIA
-
Unions join students in mass protests.
Trade unionists have now joined Serbia’s long-running student-led protests against the government, which erupted after a deadly train station collapse last year. But Serbia’s strongman president is still digging in, and has reiterated his plans to visit Moscow for WWII events on 9 May, despite European outrage. (
France24
)
🇹🇭
THAILAND
- Prosecutor to drop charges against US academic.
The highly-regarded Bangkok-based professor was facing up to 15 years in jail for allegedly insulting Thailand’s royal family. (
CNA
)
🇻🇪
VENEZUELA
–
ICJ warns Caracas against land-grab election.
The International Court of Justice has
warned
Venezuela against holding elections in disputed turf controlled by neighbouring Guyana. Caracas is yet to respond. (
Stabroek News
)
🇰🇪
KENYA
-
Kenyan politician shot dead.
Someone has gunned down a Kenyan member of parliament on the streets of the capital Nairobi, just weeks after he publicly warned that “
hired goons
” were plotting to assassinate him. The motive remains unclear. (
BBC
)
Extra Intrigue
Three stories we couldn’t shoehorn into this week’s briefings 🗞️
Gulf:
How Qatar won over Trump, and
enticed foreign diplomats
to seek a posting in the Gulf country.
Spycraft:
Inside the
CIA’s attempt to use YouTube videos
to recruit spies in China and among Russia’s disillusioned elites.
Space:
A Soviet-era
spacecraft is due to come hurling towards Earth
next week, though it’s unclear how or where (the risk to people is apparently low).
Friday quiz
Today is apparently World Tuna Day.
1) What did the world's most expensive tuna fetch at auction?
$ 300,000
$ 600,000
$ 2.2M
$ 3.1M
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) What distinguishes tuna from most other fish?
They surface to breathe air
They're warm blooded
They lay eggs in fresh water
They have small "arms"
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) When did Atlantic bluefish tuna moved from 'endangered' to 'least concern'?
2021
2022
2023
2024
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate