URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/does-the-us-credit-downgrade-matter-d7a22f1b8d33345b
Title: 🌍 Does the US credit downgrade matter?

Today’s briefing:
— Does the US credit downgrade matter?
— Melania is missing
— The Pope welcomes a Sinner
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Sometimes we’ve just gotta set aside any partisan differences, and nod in approval at a good line.
So it’s with that in mind that I tell you that, after President Trump publicly pressured Walmart to eat the tariffs rather than raise prices, folks dubbed him “
Bernie with borders
”. You see? I also nodded in approval at that good line.
Now, let’s get you up to speed on that
Moody’s US rating downgrade
.
Song of the day
Wasted Love
That’s the name of the tune that just won Eurovision in Basel (Switzerland), performed by Austrian-Filipino artist JJ. You might recall we covered the
geopolitics of Eurovision
last year.
Does the Moody’s downgrade
really
matter?
Any action movie must include a scene where the lead strolls towards camera and doesn't even flinch as the building in the background explodes into the sky.
And 116-year old ratings agency Moody's kinda did that on Friday, strolling towards the weekend while its grenade exploded with news that it was
downgrading
US debt from AAA to AA1, leaving the US without a major AAA rating for the first time in a century.
Why?
Over the past decade, Moody’s noted:
a) "
federal spending has increased
",
b) "
tax cuts have reduced government revenues
", and
c) political dysfunction means this trend is “
likely to deteriorate
”.
This wasn't a surprise
: the agency's rivals already pulled that trigger back in 2011 (S&P) and 2023 (Fitch) after bouts of debt brinkmanship in Congress, and Moody's itself already warned back in 2023 it'd be next.
But why
now
?
Sure, Friday is a good time to announce something that might get you in trouble, and the White House alleges it’s all political, but as for the month of May in 2025?
Moody's might've been watching both
a)
DOGE's progress in cutting spending, and
b)
Congress's efforts to cut revenues (taxes). And both are flashing red:
DOGE
has only itemised ~$71B in (disputed) cuts, around 97% less than the $2T Musk was initially promising, while
Tariff revenues seem unlikely to make a meaningful dent, and yet the White House is doubling down on
the president's tax cuts
that'll curb revenue further.
So seeing little prospect of reversing a fiscal trend that's been worsening since the 1990s, Moody's made its move.
But does it matter?
To paraphrase the last president to post a surplus, the definition of "
matter
" matters here.
First
, back when S&P first cut America's rating in 2011, markets panicked, then quickly forgot. This time around, there’ve been tremors in stocks and bonds, but there’s also an assumption we’ll soon skip to the forgetting part — whether this Moody's move was inevitable, late, or irrelevant (or all three), it was
already baked in
.
Second
, major players mostly lump AAA and AA1 together as risk-free (there are 21 notches on the scale), so this is unlikely to impact, say, how major funds weigh their risk.
And
third
, if the superpower with a machine printing the world's favourite currency isn't a AAA borrower, then who is? There are now barely a dozen countries on that (shrinking) list, including Australia, Germany, Norway, Singapore, and Switzerland. And even if you want to conclude that these governments are more creditworthy than the US, there just aren't that many of them — so investors wanting safe havens don’t have a lot of options.
But still, none of this is to suggest this ratings update is meaningless. Rather, it's more a reminder that, even as a superpower with the world's reserve currency,
there's a limit
to how much profligacy and dysfunction markets will tolerate.
Intrigue’s Take
This whole issue has long been one of those ✌️
over-the-horizon
✌️ things: sure, at some stage we've gotta get US finances back on a more sustainable track, but the economy is fine. And you could view these stories as steps towards that 'some stage'. The trouble is, nobody really knows when the 'then' might become 'now’, and by the time we hit 'now' it could be too late: bond markets freak out, US interest costs surge higher, and so on.
So
how tricky is the fiscal problem?
Around three quarters of US spending is already mandatory — 60% on programs like social security, Medicare, and Medicaid, with another 13% covering interest on existing debt (most of which is held within the US itself). The final 27% covers defence (12%) plus education and infrastructure (13%). All core stuff.
Meanwhile on the revenue side, even closing the '
buy, borrow, die
' loophole, that enables squillionaires to pay effective tax rates below 3%, involves political and technical hurdles.
So that might explain why Trump's treasury secretary (Bessent) focuses less on choices, and more on promising pro-growth policies, all in hopes the US might grow its way out.
Sound even smarter:
The Moody’s note also emphasises "
the size, resilience and dynamism of [the US] economy and the role of the US dollar as global reserve currency
" all mean the US still has "
exceptional credit strengths
".
Moments ago, China’s foreign ministry responded to the Moody’s move by urging the US to “
act responsibly
”.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
The Dispatch
The Dispatch: For The Silent Majority of Self-Directed Thinkers
Tired of partisan media cheerleading for one team? Start a better news habit and join
The Dispatch
.
Jonah Goldberg and Steve Hayes launched The Dispatch in 2019 to build an enduring presence for original reporting and thoughtful analysis that cuts through the partisan spin to deliver the facts. No insulting clickbait, no false outrage, no annoying auto-play videos—just reliable journalism that prioritizes context, depth, and understanding.
Join half a million loyal readers and start reading The Dispatch today.
International Intrigue readers: Claim your exclusive 30-day, all-access FREE trial today.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇯🇵
JAPAN
-
GDP falls beyond expectations.
Japan’s economy contracted 0.7% for Q1 (yoy), much steeper than the 0.2% most expected. Why? A big fall in consumption and particularly exports, Japan’s two economic engines. With US tariffs due to hit in July, things might get worse. (
DW
)
Comment:
We always knew Prime Minister Ishiba had a way with words, but we were still struck when he told parliament earlier today (Monday) that Japan’s finances are worse than Greece’s. Meanwhile, Japan’s longer-dated bond yields (30 and 40-year) have spiked, suggesting growing market sensitivity to Japan’s fiscal challenges.
🇪🇺
EUROPEAN UNION
-
UK and EU reach post-Brexit fisheries and agri deal.
Under the new deal clinched overnight, the UK will open up its waters to EU fishing for 12 years, while the EU pledges to slash red tape for British farming and fisheries exports. The news broke just as the UK and EU are expected to sign a security and defence partnership. (
Standard
)
Comment:
This deal resolves an international irritant for the UK, but might fuel a domestic one for Prime Minister Starmer, given the UK’s more conservative voices have long preferred shorter fishery deals to maintain more UK control.
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
Well wishes pour in after Joe Biden’s cancer diagnosis.
Political leaders across party and international lines are wishing the former US president well after his office announced Biden is fighting a “
more aggressive form
” of prostate cancer, which has now spread to his bones. (
CNN
)
🇷🇴
ROMANIA
-
Pro-EU mayor wins presidency.
After months of electoral chaos, Bucharest mayor Nicușor Dan has emerged the winner with a nearly 10-point win over the ultra-nationalist Eurosceptic who won the first round. (
POLITICO
)
Comment:
Sure, there’s jubilation in the streets, but 46% of voters still voted for a Kremlin-friendly outsider, revealing real discontent with the establishment. Fun fact — the president-elect (himself an anti-establishment centrist) has twice won gold at the International Math Olympiad.
🇵🇰
PAKISTAN
-
Foreign minister heads to China for talks on India.
Pakistan’s foreign minister (Ishaq Dar) has landed in China for talks about India with his counterpart Wang Yi, a week after China-backed Pakistan reached a ceasefire with their long-time shared rival. (
The Straits Times
)
🇲🇽
MEXICO
-
Sheinbaum urges against politicising Brooklyn Bridge collision.
Pledging cooperation with investigators and urging against politicisation, Mexico’s president has offered sympathies for the two sailors killed after a Mexican navy ship hit New York’s Brooklyn Bridge yesterday (several remain in critical condition). (
NYT
)
🇹🇿
TANZANIA
-
Authorities deport Kenya’s ex-justice minister.
Tanzania has deported Kenya’s respected former justice minister (Martha Karua) — she reportedly landed in town to attend the trial of Tanzania’s opposition leader over treason charges seen by many as politically motivated. (
BBC
)
Extra Intrigue
🤣
Your weekly roundup of the world’s lighter news
The Pope has
welcomed a Sinner to the Vatican
(specifically, the world’s top-ranked male tennis player, Italy’s Jannik Sinner).
Painters in Alabama will have to touch-up their handiwork after accidentally labelling a major interstate highway
‘sooth’ instead of ‘south’
.
A
duck keeps flying through
an intersection in central Switzerland, triggering the speed cameras.
A national guard crew has
landed a Blackhawk on a Montana ranch to steal some antlers
.
And a female lawmaker has turned a few heads after
using the, ahem, C-word
while addressing New Zealand’s parliament.
From our sponsors
BetterHelp is making therapy more accessible than ever this May. For a limited time, get your first week free and talk to a licensed therapist from the comfort of your home.
94% of users say they feel better after starting therapy on BetterHelp, and 93% are matched with someone who fits their needs. You can chat, call, or message your therapist whenever it works for you.
Talk to a Therapist
Statue of the day
Credit: JURE MAKOVEC/AFP.
If you’re looking for some ice-breaker conversation while you wait for those office-subsidised beans to finish grinding, we offer you the news that a bronze statue of Melania Trump in her home country of Slovenia has mysteriously gone missing.
And that’s after the last one burned down in 2020, prompting the artist to replace it with one made of less flammable bronze.
Today’s poll
Do you think credit ratings are still useful?
👍 Yes, they're an important risk index
👎 No, they've lost all credibility by now
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Last Thursday’s poll:
Why do you think Trump offered sanctions relief for post-Assad Syria?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🤝
For a deal with MBS and Erdogan (66%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
👋
Because Assad is gone (1%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
💪
Because al-Sharaa agreed to compromises (22%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write us!) (4%)
Your two cents:
🤝
J.G:
“Trump said he did it for the Saudi Crown. I don’t see a reason to doubt that. Trump’s favors aren’t free. He expects a return on the favor.”
👋
M.P:
“I don't know about Trump, but if it was up to me I would give unconditional sanctions relief to celebrate Assad's departure.”
✍️ W.F:
“Money (reconstruction deals), favors paid (MBS, Erdogan), and slap-on-the-wrist (Netanyahu).”
✍️
S.M:
“Arab states are huge buyers of Chinese-made products, engineering, and innovation. This is another signal to China that the US is targeting China's critical customer segment.”