URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/red-5aba
Title: 🌍 Duelling demands: the US vs Iran

Today’s briefing:
— The US and Iran trade demands
— A spying scandal in Greece
— Would you watch this on TV?
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Supposedly many gents dream of getting wrongly sent to prison, only to later emerge absolutely jacked like Jackman before dropping the bestselling memoir you wrote on the inside, all somehow reframing your spectacular fall from grace as a profound spiritual odyssey for the ages. Or so I’ve heard.
So I can only nod with respect at former French leader Nicolas Sarkozy for now ticking two of those three boxes:
✔️ He recently emerged from 20 days in prison for criminal conspiracy, which…
❌
Probably isn’t enough time to get shredded (we’ll defer to Carla), but…
✔️
Was
enough time to write a 216-page memoir,
Le Journal d’un Prisonnier.
Yes, Sarkozy is now topping French best-seller lists. Yes, he’s urging unity among his political brethren. And yes, he’s relitigating old scandals like the Libyan fundraising that landed him in La Santé in the first place (timely content for his pending appeal, btw).
But I will never — repeat, never — be able to top the comedy of Sarkozy insisting in his memoir, “
I am not someone who likes to complain
”, before then immediately lamenting the prison’s “
limp, damp baguette offered each day at lunch.
”
Where were we? Ah yes.
The mooted US-Iran 15-point plan
.
Number of the day
$6M
That’s how much a US jury has just ordered Meta and Google to pay a young woman in damages after finding online platforms Instagram and YouTube were intentionally addictive. Some are now comparing the landmark ruling to the fall of Big Tobacco.
Schrödinger's negotiations
Before we could get clarity on
who was lying
about the existence (or not) of US-Iran peace talks, the two foes started publicly trading conditions amongst the missiles.
So… what is each side now demanding?
America’s mooted
15-point plan
is now circulating among newsrooms after reportedly getting delivered to the Iranians via Pakistan. The White House is only saying these media reports reflect “
elements
” of the truth, but it seems the truth all looks something like this:
This US plan demands that
Iran
…
i
) Reopen the Strait of
Hormuz
ii
) Limit its ballistic
missile
inventory and range
iii
) Use
missiles
only for self-defence only
iv
) Dismantle all
nuclear
capabilities and facilities
v
) Pledge never to seek
nukes
vi
) End any uranium
enrichment
on Iranian soil
vii
) Hand its uranium over to the UN watchdog (
IAEA
)
viii
) Decommission its
underground sites
at Fordow, Isfahan, and Natanz
ix
) Commit to total nuclear
transparency
and inspections
x
) End the
policy
of supporting proxy terrorist groups (Hezbollah, Hamas, etc)
xi
) End the
practice
of supporting these groups (finance, arms etc), and
xii
) Declare an
end to this war
.
In return,
the US is offering
to…
xiii
) Remove
sanctions
on Iran
xiv
) Help Iran with
nuclear
energy
via its sole plant (Bushehr), and
xv
) End the UN-endorsed snap-back
sanctions
on Iran.
Some
intriguing things
about that list?
First
, the
nuclear
angle goes way beyond the Obama-era JCPOA constraints, which allowed Iran to maintain a
nuclear program within certain guardrails. Trump always criticised JCPOA, and will (politically at least) need something beyond JCPOA-lite.
Second
, all that focus on
missiles
is familiar — the region fears Iran’s missiles both as a delivery method for nukes, but also as a conventional weapon to re-shape the region: eg, it’s now hit regional targets to raise global costs and end this war on its own terms.
But
third
, all that traditional focus on missiles seemingly comes at the expense of any mention of
drones
, which have now helped Iran spook its neighbours, fry regional energy assets, and shut the Strait (with more units reportedly now en route from Putin).
And
fourth
, the unsexy UN technicalities can make those
snap-back sanctions
easy to skip, but it’s worth recalling it was these same sanctions that ‘snapped back’ into place in October after Iran accumulated a massive stockpile of uranium enriched to 40x the levels you’d need for peaceful purposes. Iran’s economy then collapsed, unrest ensued, and a brutal crackdown then wedged the door open for the current war. So ditching these sanctions is a real sweetener for Iran.
Now for Iran’s 5 conditions
, including…
i
) A complete
halt
to US and Israeli aggression and assassinations
ii
) Concrete
guarantees
against any future attacks
iii
) Full
payment
of US and Israeli war reparations
iv
) An end to the war for all ‘
resistance groups
’ (Hezbollah et al), and
v
) Recognition of Iran’s legal rights over
Hormuz
.
Some
intriguing things
about that list?
First
, that ‘
resistance group
’ demand really tries to link this war to Israel-Hezbollah — ie, rather than abandon Hezbollah per US demands, Iran is trying to preserve the group as its most valuable strategic asset, billions and decades in the making. This demand might also drive a wedge between Israel (which wants Hezbollah gone) and the US (which wants Hormuz reopened).
Second
, look at
what’s missing
from Iran’s list: zero mention of any
arms
or nuclear programs? It’s trying to frame these talks around what the US and Israel must surrender, while leaving its own nuclear and missile programs off the table as non-negotiable (for now).
Most official channels also omit any reference to earlier demands the US must close its
bases
in the region. Our best guess is the regime is quietly side-lining that extra-maximalist demand so it can keep projecting defiance in a way that doesn’t immediately end the dialogue, thus helping it buy time and shift blame.
Intrigue’s Take
Those of you who are also too-online will be familiar with this classic 2016 tweet:
“
Well, I'd like to see ol Donny Trump wriggle his way out of THIS jam!
*Trump wriggles his way out of the jam easily*
Ah! Well. Nevertheless.
”
The emerging economic, political, and allied jitters all now point to a real jam (for Iran too, ofc). But does the fact the two sides are now publicly exchanging demands (maximalist or not) hint at a possible wriggle ahead? It at least suggests a shared understanding this war eventually ends via some kind of deal. But there are still so many conflicting signals out there. We’re
partly
sensing a deal
due to data points like…
Iran’s speaker and FM being removed from the US-Israeli kill list
The Israelis seemingly racing to hit targets while they still can
China’s Cosco shipping giant resuming some Hormuz bookings
Trump’s team reminding journalists of his original 4-6 week timeline
Shock NYT
reports
that damaged US bases in the region are now uninhabitable
More grumbles among Trump’s own base back home
Sharper grumbles among US friends like Germany (“
no exit strategy
”), and
Israeli outlets reporting a deal could emerge as soon as this Saturday.
But we’re also
partly
sensing another escalation
via other data points like…
Iran’s speaker (Ghalibaf) claiming he has intel on US plans to take an island
Leaks via NYT that Iran’s Kharg Island oil terminal still remains a live option
Trump’s own team war-gaming what $200 oil prices might mean
A continued US build-up not only of Marines, but also now paratroopers
Israeli media reporting this build-up is actually a fake-out for special ops, and
Some in Trump’s own party strongly hinting a ground operation is imminent.
That’s a lot of mixed signals.
And the bottom line is — leaving aside any merits let alone morality — both sides are highly performative, meaning this could all be
a
) leverage to de-escalate,
b
) deception to re-escalate, or
c
) both. And the truth is, we’ve seen both Iran and Trump try it all.
Sound even smarter:
Iranian outlets have started flagging the possibility of the regime expanding its retaliation to
Bab al-Mandab Strait
— that’s the Suez / Red Sea chokepoint in the south, typically handling another ~10% of world trade.
Iranian lawmakers are drafting a law to allow the state to levy fees on vessels seeking to pass through the Strait of Hormuz. This could put shipping companies in a bind, caught between market needs and potential sanctions.
One
estimate
puts the cumulative death toll from this war at around ~4,500.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
Grey Dynamics
Every major intelligence recruitment follows the same five-phase structure. Build rapport. Establish context. Align your offer with what the other person actually wants. Address their concerns before they raise them. Close with clarity.
This is the Pitch Framework. It is the same methodology CIA officers use to develop human sources, now taught to professionals in policy, finance, and corporate strategy.
Grey Dynamics’ HUMINT Fundamentals course is taught by Ray White, a retired CIA senior operations officer with 25+ years running the Agency’s largest training programme. You will learn why preparation is the pitch, why motivations drive everything, and why the best proposals never feel like proposals at all.
Download The Pitch Framework and see for yourself.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
Are you free in May?
The White House has announced President Trump’s long-awaited meeting with Xi Jinping is now confirmed for May, after the Iran War forced the US to reschedule. Trump says he’ll return the favour and host China’s leader later this year. (
CNBC
)
🇰🇵
NORTH KOREA
-
Emily in Pyongyang.
Belarusian dictator Alexander Lukashenko has arrived in North Korea for a two-day official visit at Kim's invitation. (
Al Jazeera
)
Comment
:
Both Putin allies, the visit is classic pariah diplomacy to signal solidarity and explore options to dodge sanctions — but we wonder whether it'll all prompt a rethink of recent US carrots to entice Lukashenko out of Putin's orbit.
🇪🇪
ESTONIA
-
Watch out.
Stray Ukrainian drones entered Estonian and Latvian airspace yesterday (Wednesday), with one crashing into an Estonian power plant. The drones were seemingly part of Ukraine’s attack on Russia’s Baltic oil facilities. (
France24
)
🇻🇳
VIETNAM
-
Going nuclear.
Russia has signed a deal to build Vietnam’s first nuclear power plant, though actual costs and construction timelines are still TBC. (
WNN
)
Comment
:
Vietnam killed this idea back in 2016 after project costs nearly doubled, but it’s now reviving the plan amid a manufacturing-driven energy crunch back home and fuel chaos abroad. As for Moscow, its nuclear prowess (controlling 90% of the build-to-order market, spanning a dozen countries) helps blunt Western isolation.
🇨🇱
CHILE
-
Withdraw support.
Chile’s conservative new president (Kast) has withdrawn his country’s support for left-leaning former leader Michelle Bachelet in the race to become the next UN Secretary General. (
El Pais
)
Comment
:
It’s not the end of the UN road for Bachelet, who enjoys early support from Mexico and Brazil. The bigger hurdles might be China (which disliked her UN-era Uyghur scrutiny) and the US (which has bristled at her Israel criticism).
🇸🇳
SENEGAL
-
No secrets here.
Senegal has denied allegations the country secretly borrowed ~$750M to avoid a default, insisting everything was above board. (
AfricaNews
)
Comment
:
The risk is this (again) just erodes trust with the IMF, investors, and ratings agencies, making future financing more costly.
Extra Intrigue
In other worlds…
Tech
: The convicted founder of a cyberintelligence firm at the heart of Greece’s spyware scandal is now hinting the
Greek government was behind the hacking
of dozens of politician, journalist, and military phones.
Art
: A group of Iranian archaeologists is mapping the war’s
damage to historical sites
.
Entertainment
:
US TV host and JRR Tolkien superfan Stephen Colbert will
co-write the next
Lord of the Rings
movie
.
Reality show of the day
Credits: TV 2/ Krestine Havemann.
Imagine being trapped in a college with your
rivals
co-workers for 24 hours. Depending how much you like them, it’s either a dream or a nightmare.
But that’s exactly what happened to Denmark’s 12 political party leaders, who agreed to spend a day together for a TV program in advance of this past Tuesday’s snap election. Based on a Belgian format, ‘Højskolen’ (The College) blends aspects of reality TV with political debates, hoping to bring politicians closer to their electorates by turning down the temperature and getting them to do normal things like, you know, sing and cook.
Today’s poll
Do you think Denmark's reality TV format could work well for other democracies?
👍 Yes, it brings politicians closer to the ground
🚫 No, it cheapens the democratic process
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Which energy do you think will benefit most from this Iran crisis?
🌬️
Renewables (35%)
🏭 Coal (31%)
☢️ Nuclear (17%)
🛢️ Oil (12%)
💨
Gas (4%)
Other (write in!) (1%)
Your two cents:
🌬️
P.F:
“Short term, probably coal will get the greatest kick, but long term, renewables.”
🏭
K.M:
“Easier to quickly pivot to coal.”
🛢️
S:
“I want to say renewables, because that's the obvious play to make yourself more resilient. However, it’s more likely higher oil prices make it more economically viable to bring more oil capacity online, perpetuating the status quo.”