URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/economic-news-russia-china-japan
Title: 🌍 Economic news from Russia, China and Japan

Today’s newsletter supported by:
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Some leaders are long-time cast members on the world stage: Sobhuza II, for instance, ruled Swaziland (Eswatini) for almost 83 years. Others just make the briefest of cameos: like Louis XIX, who ran France for 20 minutes, or Pedro Lascuráin, who was Mexico’s leader for less than 1,000 seconds.
🎂
And speaking of cast members… today’s the birthday of our very own podcast host
Ethan Plotkin
! You can hear his velvety smooth voice on
Intrigue Outloud
🎧
Today’s briefing is a 4 min read:
💵
Mixed signals from the
global economy
.
🇨🇳
China
announces new laser weapon tech.
➕
Plus:
A very tall country, how the papers are covering a US-Iran prisoner swap, and why folks in the Philippines are googling ‘Michael Oher’.
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇵🇰
Pakistan
: Anwaar ul Haq Kakar, a relatively unknown lawmaker with ties to the military establishment, has been appointed Pakistan’s
new interim prime minister
. His caretaker administration is tasked with stewarding the government’s day-to-day operations while overseeing upcoming elections.
🇪🇺
EU
: New data suggests most
EU states will reach their solar energy goals
ahead of the 2030 deadline. The EU added 41 GW in solar capacity last year and will add another 50 GW in 2023.
🇸🇬
Singapore
: Authorities have issued a
statement
warning the city-state is not immune from foreign interference in next month’s presidential elections. Earlier, two veteran Singaporean diplomats
said
the US and China were in a “
battle of narratives
” to shape public opinion.
🇲🇽
Mexico
: The president (‘AMLO’) has unveiled a new
military-run airline
to launch next month. AMLO has previously criticised the privatisation of state enterprises, and has placed ferry lines, train routes and other civilian projects under military command.
🇸🇦
Saudi Arabia
: Riyadh has asked to
join a UK-Italy-Japan
joint program building the next generation of fighter jets. Saudi participation would help share the costs, but could attract controversy due to criticism of the kingdom’s human rights record.
💵
Global | Geo-economics
Three economies, three directions
Several major economies posted data this week, offering insights into the state of the global economy.
🇨🇳
In
China
:
Beijing
says
it’ll no longer post data on youth unemployment, which hit a record 21.3% in June (
exports
then plunged in July), so…
The central bank just
cut
interest rates to support China’s recovery.
🇷🇺
In
Russia
:
The ruble has nearly
halved
in value since its peak mid last year, as the world’s most sanctioned country loses export income, so…
Russia’s central bank has again
raised
rates
to support the ruble.
🇯🇵
And in
Japan
:
The world’s third-largest economy grew at an
annualised rate of 6%
in Q2,
double
what most economists expected
This is partly due to post-COVID freight and travel conditions allowing Japan to sell more cars abroad, while welcoming more tourists at home.
Intrigue's take:
As always, there’s more to each story here:
China’s
unique model was slowing well before US-China ties really deteriorated. So Western pressure isn’t the primary cause of China’s current woes, but it does narrow Beijing’s options to address them.
Russia’s
economic survival is thanks in part to its competent central bank chief, Elvira Nabiullina. Once seen as a reformer, she dismayed international admirers by deciding to stay put after the invasion. The ruble’s fate is tied to hers, and Putin knows this.
And
Japan’s
net exports aside, most dash-lights (like consumption) are flashing orange right now. So don’t crack that saké just yet.
Also worth noting:
A spokesperson for China’s statistics bureau said authorities
stopped posting youth unemployment
data because their stats needed to be “
advanced and optimised
”.
Russians withdrew
$1.1B in rubles
from banks in a single weekend during June’s brief Wagner mutiny.
📰
How newspapers covered…
A prisoner swap deal between the US and Iran
Ankara, Turkey
“Iran confirms deal with US on prisoner swap, unlocking $10B in frozen assets in South Korea, Iraq”
Seoul, South Korea
“U.S. confirms unfrozen Iranian funds to be used for humanitarian purposes”
Jerusalem
“US-Iran prisoner swap said to be part of larger deal that addresses nuclear program”
Today’s newsletter is supported by: Vinovest
Don’t Just Drink Wine, Invest in it Too.
Yes, you can invest in wine; the ultra-wealthy have been doing it for centuries, when wine investing was limited to exclusive auctions.
Enter Vinovest, a platform that enables anyone to invest in wine and whiskey. It uses master sommeliers and AI algorithms to build a diversified wine portfolio based on your investing preferences.
Vinovest authenticates, stores, and insures your wine, but you still own it 100%. Discover wine and whiskey investing today, and your wealth will thank you.
Get started today!
🇨🇳
China | Defence & security
China announces new anti-satellite laser tech
Researchers at China’s National University of Defence Technology say they’ve
developed a new cooling system
that allows laser weapons to fire indefinitely without overheating, with possible use against satellites.
Are laser weapons a thing now?
Yes, but not in the Death Star sense (yet). Militaries in
the US
, Israel, and elsewhere have developed laser systems to intercept small airborne targets, but their use is still pretty limited.
So China says its new breakthrough could be a game changer
, by:
⏰
Extending engagement times
🚀
Increasing range and damage, and
💸
Reducing costs.
Intrigue’s take:
We generally take these kinds of big futuristic claims with enough salt to make the Dead Sea jealous.
But China has form here: it made another intriguing laser
announcement
last year. And we’ve written often about how rapidly the future seems to be bearing down upon us. It just may not always be the future we want.
Also worth noting:
Israel’s
Iron Beam
laser weapon could be integrated into its Iron Dome defence system by 2025.
➕
Extra Intrigue
Here’s what folks around the world were googling yesterday, 15 August.
🇬🇷
Greeks
were searching ‘
Ποιοι γιορτάζουν σήμερα
‘ (
who is celebrating today?
) as they marked the
Dormition of Virgin Mary
.
🇨🇦
Canadian
fans were googling the latest from the
FIFA
Women's World Cup
, after their team was unexpectedly eliminated last month.
Netizens in the
🇵🇭
Philippines
read up on ‘
Michael Oher
’, the NFL player whose life inspired the hit film
The Blind Side
, and who’s now made
damning accusations
against his adoptive family.
🗳️ Poll time!
What do you think will be the next frontier of modern warfare?
🚨 Laser weapons
🤖 Lethal autonomous weapons
🚀 Satellite weapons
💻 Cyber weapons
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
🗺️
Map of the day
Source: Reddit
The northernmost point in Brazil, Monte Caburaí, is closer to Canada and every other country in the Americas than it is to Brazil’s own southernmost point, Arroio Chuí. Big country, that!
Yesterday’s poll:
Should the international community recognise and cooperate with the Taliban?
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 👍 Yes, it could help save lives  (11%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
⛔ No, that'd cross too many red lines (84%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write-in) (5%)
Your two cents
:
👍 M.G:
“As a former diplomat, and one who spent time in Afghanistan, I know the choices are bleak. But ignoring the Taliban will not reform them; that requires engagement, no matter how distasteful that is.”
⛔ W.L: “
[…] If the international community recognizes and cooperates with the Taliban, they will simply take the aid and change nothing.”
✍️ C.W.F:
“Damned if you do, damned if you don’t […]”
🍨
PS
- our managing editor (Jeremy) will be in
Sydney
next Wednesday 23 and Thursday 24 August. Hit reply if you wanted to catch up over a frozen yoghurt!