URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/ecuadors-president-dissolves-parliament
Title: 🌍 Ecuador's president dissolves parliament

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Some world leaders seem to stumble at the first hurdle: getting dressed. A former dictator in Chile used to get around in
capes
. Over in Iran, the boss used to
dress
as if he was about to crush a Tom Collins down at the country club. And in Cuba, Fidel ditched sartorial style altogether and instead dialled the comfort (and intimidation) all the way up to 11 by going
full Adidas
.
Today’s briefing is a 4.5 min read:
🇪🇨
Ecuador
’s president rolls the dice.
🇱🇧
French prosecutors charge a top
Lebanese
official with corruption.
➕
Plus:
A tasty world record, how the papers are covering the dissolution of Ecuador’s legislature, and are young workers bad at work-life balance?
🗺️ AROUND THE WORLD
🇦🇿
Azerbaijan:
Officials in Azerbaijan say they’ve foiled an Iranian-backed coup attempt by
arresting seven saboteurs
on Tuesday (16 May). Tensions between the two countries have been growing since a gunman attacked the Azerbaijani embassy in Tehran in January.
🇳🇱
Netherlands
: British PM Rishi Sunak and Dutch PM Mark Rutte will form an
“international coalition”
to help
procure F-16 fighter jets
for Ukraine. Any transfers of US-made F-16s would require US approval.
🇮🇩
Indonesia
: Authorities arrested Indonesia’s communications minister yesterday (Wednesday). Prosecutors say the minister may have
embezzled funds
that were meant for cell tower construction.
🇯🇲
Jamaica
: UN chief António Guterres has thanked Prime Minister Andrew Holness for offering to
send Jamaican troops
to trouble-stricken Haiti. No other country has offered troops yet, despite a plea from Haiti’s prime minister.
🇳🇬
Nigeria
: Gunmen in Nigeria’s southeast
attacked a US convoy
late Tuesday, killing four local security and embassy employees and kidnapping another three. Officials say the attack was carried out by a separatist group.
🇪🇨
ECUADOR | POLITICS
Ecuadorian President Guillermo Lasso.
Ecuador’s president dissolves parliament amid impeachment
Briefly:
Ecuadorian President Guillermo Lasso
dissolved the opposition-led parliament
yesterday (Wednesday), hours after the start of his impeachment trial over alleged embezzlement. He announced the move via a
tweet
, followed by a
video
of the country’s security chiefs affirming the move’s constitutionality.
Trouble has been brewing for a while.
Over recent years, Ecuador has seen:
📉
a steady economic decline
📈
increased gang-related violence and,
👮
allegations of corruption at the highest levels.
The right-leaning Lasso
came to power in a surprise 2021 election win but soon faced opposition from a left-leaning legislature, which moved to impeach him earlier this year. That process looked set to remove Lasso from office within days, even though it stemmed from a contract signed under the previous government.
So after months of deadlock
, Lasso used Ecuador’s
muerte cruzada
(mutual death) clause to dissolve the legislature and trigger early elections. He’s said he’ll run for re-election and, in the meantime, is ruling by decree (overseen by Ecuador’s top court).
Intrigue’s take:
In a heated environment, folks can reach very different conclusions from the same set of facts. And that’s what’s happening in Ecuador:
✊
Opponents
:
Lasso is a right-wing figure who’s undermining democracy to avoid corruption charges and cling to power, ruling by decree and using the army for political purposes.
👍
Supporters
:
The left-wing legislature has ground the country to a halt, so the president has used the constitution to bring elections forward and let the people decide.
So… which one is true? A lot depends on what Lasso does next: will he usher in swift elections and a smooth transition of power? Or will he use his new decree powers to push through controversial changes? Or maybe a mix of the two.
Also worth noting:
Lasso’s approval rating was
13% in March
. The legislature’s approval rating was around
half that.
A key indigenous organisation in Ecuador, which led major protests last year, has described the situation as a “
dictatorship scenario
.”
Lasso’s first act with his new decree powers was to sign into law a bill that boosts tax deductions for families and tweaks them for small firms.
📰
GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES
How different newspapers covered
: The dissolution of Ecuador’s legislature.
Links
:
La Hora
,
La República
,
El Espectador
Have you checked out Intrigue Outloud?
Meet your new favourite podcast.
Did you know that every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, we drop a new podcast episode? It covers everything from Indo-Pacific security and Rwandan democracy, through to Israeli protests and Salvadoran politics. Here’s what you can expect:
Mondays and Wednesdays
we add some extra colour to the biggest geopolitical stories of the week. At 10-15 mins long, it’s perfect for your commute!
On Fridays
, our very own Ethan Plotkin dives deep with politicians, ambassadors, military leaders, and analysts on the most pressing issues facing our world. Ethan’s interview with a Rwandan opposition leader was a real highlight.
Make sure you don’t miss out on tomorrow’s episode with Turkish analyst Gonul Tol
,
who will help us understand how so many pollsters got the Turkish election wrong.
Available wherever you get your podcasts.
🇱🇧
LEBANON | GEOPOLITICS
Lebanon’s central bank governor Riad Salameh has a warrant out for his arrest.
French prosecutors issue arrest warrant for Lebanon’s central bank chief
Briefly:
French prosecutors have issued an arrest warrant (on corruption charges) for the long-time head of Lebanon’s central bank, Riad Salameh. Salameh denies the charges and has called the warrant a
“violation of laws”
.
Salameh was once considered the guardian
of Lebanon’s economy. But many now blame him for a financial implosion that’s plunged millions into poverty.
Half a dozen countries (including Lebanon) are now investigating him and his brother for fraud, including allegations they embezzled
$330M
over the years.
Intrigue’s take:
Just last year, European authorities froze
$130M
in assets
linked to the investigation.
Where there’s smoke there’s often fire, right? But honestly, we haven’t seen this much smoke since Snoop Dogg came to town.
Of course, even if Salameh is guilty, that doesn’t mean he’ll face justice. Lebanon’s powerful elite isn’t exactly known for allowing these kinds of probes. Just last week, the Lebanese judge leading his investigation was
dismissed
.
Also worth noting:
Salameh, who’s been central bank governor for almost 30 years, has said he’ll step down when his current term ends in July.
In 2021, the judge investigating the explosion at Beirut’s port the year prior was
removed after filing charges
against government ministers.
👀
EXTRA INTRIGUE
When we’re not working on your favourite newsletter, we read about… work.
My company introduced a four-day workweek. Guess what happened?
($)
Not everyone can disconnect with Belgium’s right to disconnect
The jobs AI won't take yet
Young workers are bad at work-life balance
($)
📸
​ PHOTO OF THE DAY
Credits: Vanguard News.
Nigerian chef Hilda Baci
broke the world record
for the longest cooking marathon after cooking, sauteing, chopping and braising for 100 hours straight. Baci prepared over 100 dishes in front of a crowd of supporters cheering her on.
🗳️ POLL TIME!
How many languages do you speak? And what are they?
🙂 Just the one
✌️ I'm bilingual
💆 I know three
🧠 Three or more, not to brag or anything
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Is the EU right in green-lighting Microsoft's Activision Blizzard acquisition?
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️ 🎮 Yes, Blizzard games will achieve new heights now (43%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🧯
No, they'll smother the competition (54%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 🖋️ Other (write in!)  (3%)
Your two cents:
🖋️
N.J.G.D:
“Given Blizzard Activision's current track record, I don't believe it will be enough to launch Microsoft ahead of any competition. Hopefully some management change comes along to make the company a less toxic work environment!”
🎮
M.M:
“Don't see what the big deal is, even if they had kept Activision's games console exclusive, you don't see Mario jumping around on a Playstation either...”