URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/europe-looks-towards-indopacific
Title: 🌍 Europe looks towards the Indo-Pacific

Today’s newsletter supported by:
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
We’ve been searching for an excuse to mention Wimbledon for two weeks, and we’ve finally found it. No, we’re not talking about Belarusian player Victoria Azarenka getting booed off the court by some particularly harsh fans, but rather
the story of a very special crystal
only found in the North Sea that keeps Wimbledon’s grass so darned green. Deep sea mining and grass court tennis, together at last!
Today’s briefing is a 5 min read:
🇩🇪
Germany
will send soldiers to Australia (to be clear, they’ve been invited)
🤝
Janet Yellen concludes a moderately successful trip to
China
➕
Plus:
new leadership in the Netherlands, how the papers are covering China and the Solomon Islands deepening their diplomatic relations, and Nigeria recovers from flooding.
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇺🇿
Uzbekistan
: President Shavkat Mirziyoyev was
reelected on Sunday for an additional seven-year term
. Mirziyoyev secured 87.1% of the vote in an election that regional security body OSCE said lacked "
genuine competition
."
🇱🇹
Lithuania
: NATO leaders flew into Vilnius for the
first day of this year’s NATO summit
. There’s plenty on the agenda, including Sweden’s (
and possibly Ukraine’s
) membership bid, the ongoing Russo-Ukraine War, and, as always, China.
🇹🇭
Thailand
: Popular tourist destination Koh Samui is
facing a severe water drought
due to below-average rainfall and a resurgence in tourists. Reports suggest the island only has enough water to last another 30 days.
🇺🇸
US
: North Korea has warned the US it may
shoot down spy planes violating its airspace
after a reported incident involving an American ‘reconnaissance aircraft’. It also said any US plans to deploy a nuclear-armed submarine near the Korean peninsula would be “
a grave threat to peace
”.
🇹🇷
Turkey
: Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky returned from a trip to Turkey with unexpected cargo:
five commanders from the Azovstal garrison
. Russia accused Turkey of breaching a prisoner exchange deal that required them to remain in Turkey until the end of the war.
🇩🇪
Germany | Geopolitics
Is the EU turning towards the Indo-Pacific?
Berlin is preparing to send 240 armed troops to Australia
to attend joint military exercises Down Under. It’s the latest signal that Germany is turning its foreign policy focus to the Indo-Pacific after it also pledged to deploy two warships to the region in 2024.
Chief of the German Army Alfons Mais said joining the exercises was necessary considering “
the economic interdependencies
” between Berlin and the region.
Over 30,000 troops from 12 countries
will be participating
in the biannual joint drills, so while Germany’s participation is noteworthy, the exercises aren’t exactly exclusive.
Of course, Germany isn’t the only European country
that has shifted its focus eastward lately:
🇬🇧
The
UK
is poised to
officially join
the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP) free trade agreement.
🇮🇹
Italy
has
promised to
send a patrol vessel
to Southeast Asia to engage in exercises with “
friendly navies
”.
🇱🇹
Lithuania
, the
Czech Republic
and
Poland
recently published new
Indo-Pacific strategies
.
Intrigue’s take:
The EU has considerable economic interests in the Indo-Pacific - it is the
region’s top investor
, leading development partner, and critical trading partner.
There are also ~1.65 million French citizens living
in French territories throughout the region
, which gives one of the EU’s most influential members a territorial interest in the Indo-Pacific as well.
The problem for Europe is that it must pursue all these interests without upsetting an increasingly assertive China,
something French President Emmanuel Macron would tell you
is far easier said than done.
Also worth noting:
Germany confirmed it will purchase 100 Australian military vehicles as part of a
$1B military deal
announced yesterday.
In April 2021, the EU published its first
Indo-Pacific policy
, outlining its commitments to the region and affirming its intention to grow its involvement.
📰
How newspapers covered…
China and the Solomon Islands upgrading their diplomatic relationship during Prime Minister Manasseh Sogavare’s visit to China yesterday.
New York, US
“Solomon Islands leader visits Beijing, highlighting US-China rivalry in South Pacific”
Tokyo, Japan
“China, Solomon Islands set up comprehensive strategic partnership”
Beijing, China
“Sogavare’s visit to deepen ties between China and Solomons”
Today’s newsletter is supported by:
1440
News Without Motives.
1440 is the daily newsletter helping 2M+ Americans stay informed - it’s news without motives, edited to be unbiased as humanly possible. The team at 1440 scours over 100+ sources, so you don’t have to.
Culture, science, sports, politics, business, and everything in between - in a five-minute read each morning, 100% free.
Sign up now!
🤝
US | Geopolitics
Yellen finds her voice in China
US Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen departed Beijing on Sunday after several days of talks with Chinese officials that she called
“direct, substantive and productive.”
Yellen’s visit comes as
the Biden Administration struggles to balance its economic policy toward China rhetorically:
💔
China hawks have called for
‘decoupling’
- a total divorce from Chinese supply chains
🤨
Others, including National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan, have described the US approach as
‘de-risking’
the US economy’s exposure to China
🗺️ But Yellen, who
warned earlier this year
that
“a full separation of our economies would be disastrous for both countries,”
used a third d-word during her trip, saying the US wants to “
diversify
its critical supply chains.
”
Intrigue’s take:
From a Chinese perspective, it probably doesn’t matter which word the US chooses if it continues to impose trade tariffs and technology bans against China and goes through with
plans to introduce new restrictions
on American investment in Chinese defence technology.
The good news is that Yellen spent
more than 10 hours in meetings
getting to know China’s new economic leaders.
And it seems she made quite an impression; the Global Times (the Chinese Communist Party’s famously strident tabloid) reported that Chinese Premier Li Qiang said, “
China-US ties can see ‘rainbows’ after a round of ‘wind and rain’
”.
Also worth noting:
US climate envoy John Kerry is scheduled to be the
next top US official to visit China
, where he’ll attempt to restart climate negotiations that were suspended last year.
China has demanded the US lift sanctions in order to
resume military-to-military negotiations
.
➕
Extra Intrigue
We’re very online, so you don’t have to be.
Will Spanish PM Pedro Sanchez keep defying the odds?
How the West can prevent OPEC-style cartels for critical resources
The aftermath of Nigeria’s floods
South Korea prepares for its ageing population
Putin met Prigozhin for three hours, days after his coup attempt
(And no, we don’t have any idea what’s going on in Russia right now!)
🎧 Today on
Intrigue Outloud
NATO Secretary-General Jens Stoltenberg. Credits: Mindaugas Kulbis/AP.
Is Ukraine ready to join NATO?
Find out here!
🗳️ Poll time!
Which of the following geographic features do you think is most important for a country's economic growth?
🌊 Access to the sea/ocean
⛵ Extensive inland waterways
⛰️ A protective mountain range
🌾 Grassy flats
🌡️ Mild climates
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
👨
Profile of the day
Prime Minister Mark Rutte. Credit: Piroschka van de Wouw/Reuters
Mark Rutte is leaving politics…
… after 13 years as Dutch prime minister and 17 years as leader of the centre-right People’s Party for Freedom and Democracy. His leadership across four governments and countless political crises earned him the nickname “Teflon Mark”, but his current coalition fell apart last week (7 July) after
failing to agree to a new asylum policy
.
Yesterday’s poll:
Are you team Twitter or team Threads?
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️ 🐦 Twitter   (21%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🧵
Threads (12%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🤷
Why not both? (14%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🏆 This is a competition with no victors (44%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!) (9%)
Your two cents
:
🏆
J.C:
“Threads is quite literally a privacy nightmare in waiting, and Twitter remains a poorly-run shell of its former self. Hard to see either as a win.”
🐦
D:
“Threads so far is the exact same content as Instagram. Twitter is better for breaking news.”