URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/europe-s-big-ukraine-compromise
Title: 🌍 Europe’s big Ukraine compromise

Today’s briefing:
— Europe’s Ukraine compromise
— Egypt’s big deal
— Blast from the corporate past
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. A secret is something you tell less than ten people, but I’ll tell you anyway: while this is
our last regular briefing for the year
, we’ll drop a few special editions over the break, so be sure to check your inbox.
We’ll then be back to regular programming from Monday 5th January, but until then, allow me this one moment of off-brand sentimentality to confess we’re deeply grateful for your support this year (150,000 subscribers!), and no matter what the headlines throw at this wild world of ours, we’re tireless optimists for what 2026 might bring.
Now go eat a turkey while we brief you on the
frozen Russian assets dividing Europe
.
PS —
¿Hablas Español?
¡Check out our
weekly edition in Spanish
!
Number of the day
1995
That’s the last time Japan’s benchmark rate reached 0.75%. Central bank governor Ueda just hit it again after raising rates a quarter point on Friday, with more expected in 2026.
Crunch time!
On the first day of Christmas, my true love gave to me… $245B in frozen Russian assets.
It’s an unauthorised carol remix, but it cuts to the heart of a debate now splitting Europe.
So here’s what you need to know.
There’s a general consensus Ukraine will run out of money some time next year. The fear is this would risk Ukraine’s capitulation, reward Putin’s aggression, and bring the emboldened despot one step closer to the EU’s borders.
So European leaders in Brussels have just pulled an all-nighter haggling over a response:
Option A
is to use frozen
Russian assets
in Brussels to back a $105B loan for Ukraine’s self defence. Any Ukrainian repayments would be tied to Russia first paying Ukraine reparations for the damage Putin’s war has caused. Or…
Option B
is to leave Putin’s frozen assets alone and instead use
more European debt
to fund Ukraine’s self-defence.
Moments ago Europe’s leaders landed pretty close to option B. But first…
Why such a big spat over this?
👍 Those in favour of tapping Putin’s assets
For the majority of European leaders (including Germany’s Merz and Poland’s Tusk), using Putin’s assets via option A is a win-win-win-win-win-win. It’d:
Curb Putin’s ability to recoup his staggering losses
Extend Ukraine’s ability to defend itself
Spare Europe’s own debt-strained balance sheets
Deal Europe back into the US-Russia peace talks
Push back on DC-Moscow claims of European decline, and
Pressure Putin to end his war, rather than Zelensky to hand over more land.
The other bonus is this option doesn’t need
unanimous EU approval
, side-lining the more Eurosceptic players like Hungary’s Orbán, Slovakia’s Fico, and now Czechia’s Babiš.
Option B, on the other hand, would
ordinarily
need EU consensus, and still hits European balance sheets, lending weight to Putin’s stated hopes for eventual European fatigue.
👎
Those against tapping Putin’s assets
A smaller number of European players have continued to flag some big concerns:
Belgium
’s De Wever wants full EU backing in case of Russian reprisals or legal action, so he sums it up like this: “
Give me a parachute and we’ll all jump together.
”
But other EU leaders are wary of issuing a potential blank cheque — eg,
if Putin retaliates
by seizing private Belgian assets in Russia, that should just be a problem for those who ignored the warnings about staying in Russia.
Meanwhile, opponents (including Italy) have variously raised other issues including…
Reputational
: The world stashes its cash in Europe on faith European leaders won’t seize your assets
Legal
: Fitch just
placed
Belgium’s Euroclear depository on negative watch, citing low but “
potentially increased liquidity and legal risks
” from option A
Historical
: Europe didn’t even do ~this with German assets during WWII (though post-war reparations largely comprised in-kind confiscation of German assets)
Practical
: Belgium’s De Wever has likened option A to eating the goose that lays the golden eggs (a reference to the $5-6B in annual interest these frozen assets already generate for Ukraine’s self-defence)
Precedent
: If world powers keep yoinking assets, where does this end? And…
Retribution
: Euroclear executives have already had to hire bodyguards amid intimidation from the Kremlin, which continues to make vague threats.
On their face, most concerns stem from one core question above:
is this asset plan legal?
And the answer seems a pretty strong yes, for two big reasons:
First
, the proposals are carefully drafted to avoid outright asset seizure — rather, they involve (say) swapping Russian cash for European bonds. So the merits are strong.
But second
, Russia doesn’t really have options to test the legality here either way:
Its 1989 investment treaty with Belgium doesn’t cover these kinds of central bank assets, and
The EU actually banned enforcing
Russian
court orders a decade ago, so
Putin’s vaunted new lawsuit via a Russian court is a little like Ronald McDonald threatening to sue you in his own McSupreme Court. Good luck, Ronald.
Anyway, leaders just agreed to go with option B, issuing new joint debt to finance a $105B loan for Ukraine. Shoot for the frozen assets and you might land on joint borrowing.
Intrigue’s Take
There’s a mixture of celebration and despair right now.
Critics
say EU divisions have again cost the bloc a chance to send this war’s invoice right back to its protagonist and hasten his halt, instead further burdening the European taxpayer, while emboldening Putin’s hopes that the West will eventually just give up.
But…
why did Putin leave so much cash in Europe
in the first place? The answer points to another Putin miscalculation: he actually pivoted assets
into Europe
before his war. Why? Assuming a quick win plus continued energy leverage, he never imagined a Europe instead seizing his assets and weaning itself off Russian gas while Ukraine fought back.
But here we are. And despite EU divisions, it still
a
) found a way out, including
b
) more historic eurobonds, plus
c
) a loan Ukraine realistically won’t have to repay, and has now
d
) permanently frozen Putin’s assets, all while
e
) side-lining the usual eurosceptics via a workaround.
So it might be a messy photo finish, but it’s hardly an outcome for Putin to celebrate.
Sound even smarter:
US-Russia talks are due to resume in Miami this weekend.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
We got a TikTok deal.
After months of wrangling, TikTok has agreed to move its US operations to a new joint venture to avoid a threatened US ban. The new JV will reportedly be majority US-owned (including via Oracle and Silver Lake) and governed by a majority US-board. Other players getting a slice include state-owned Emirati investor MGX with 15%, and existing China-based parent company Bytedance with 19.9%. (
CNBC
)
Comment
: So… who wins? TikTok survives in the US, and the US-dominated structure (including Oracle-controlled data) allays many of the natsec concerns. The remaining unease is now around the fact the China-based parent company still retains ownership of TikTok’s secret sauce (the algorithm), even if it’s now trained on US data.
🇪🇺
EUROPEAN UNION
-
Sign later.
EU leaders have pulled a last-minute delay on signing their landmark trade deal with South America’s Mercosur bloc, following pushback from local farmers protesting against cheap imports from Latin America. (
Politico
)
Comment
: This deal has been in the works for a quarter century, and at this point, everyone’s wondering whether the EU’s own centrifugal forces are stronger than any collective desire to get this thing done. Coming the same week as the EU struggles over its approach to Russian assets, the bloc is sending some pretty mid signals.
🇹🇼
TAIWAN
-
Up in arms.
Washington has approved one of its largest-ever defence packages for Taiwan, including $11B in missiles, drones, and artillery systems. (
Bloomberg
$)
Comment:
Beijing has reiterated its usual opposition to these sales, which follow a 1979 law obligating the US to provide the self-governing island with defensive arms to resist force (from China). But this bump in size suggests the porcupine strategy remains key: deterrence by denial, making any invasion prohibitively costly.
🇬🇧
UNITED KINGDOM
-
New guy in town.
The Starmer government has appointed a new envoy to DC, career diplomat Christian Turner, replacing the last guy who was ousted over Epstein links. (
Guardian
)
Comment:
A career diplomat seems a bold move in a power-town now wary of what it sees as the deep state. But at this point, London likely just wants someone low-risk now that the UK has survived the first year of Trump 2.0 *relatively* unscathed.
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
Free trader?
Hainan, China’s southern island province, is launching an ambitious plan to rival the likes of Hong Kong and Singapore as a global shipping port, allowing 74% of goods to enter the island tariff-free (up from 21% just last week). (
Straits Times
)
Comment:
Beyond any broader branding as a free trade port in a tariff storm, China has long wanted to beef up its Hainan footprint to strengthen its South China Sea presence and deepen its integration into Southeast Asia. But these initiatives keep bumping up against Hainan’s small population and lack of skilled workers.
🇵🇦
PANAMA
-
First flight outta here.
Panama has announced its first direct
voluntary return
flight for 70 undocumented Venezuelan migrants straight to Caracas rather than via Colombia. (
Reuters
)
Comment
: It’s part of a US-funded program to stem migrant flows through Panama’s infamous Darién Gap. Direct repatriation flights to Venezuela were previously hard amid Panama’s refusal to recognise Maduro’s stolen re-election last year. We wonder if the resumption now reflects a decline in Maduro’s leverage given all the US pressure.
🇪🇬
EGYPT
-
Art of the deal.
Israel’s Netanyahu has hailed a $35B deal via Chevron to supply 130 billion cubic meters of natural gas from the vast Leviathan field to Egypt through 2040, the largest in Israel's history. (
AA
)
Comment
: This is a big deal, potentially stabilising a) Israel’s ties with Egypt, b) US-led Abraham Accord talks on Israel’s regional recognition, and c) Egypt’s own energy mix, while also d) diluting reliance on Qatari or Russian gas, and e) enabling Egypt to export more LNG to Europe, in turn f) further diversifying Europe’s own energy mix.
Extra Intrigue
Three stories we couldn’t shoehorn in this week
🥾
An unexpected essay on how a Europe “
in decline
”
could be okay after all
— “
a pleasant public allotment in the suburbs of the new global order might be more than enough.
”
An amusing tale of how the Wall Street Journal let
AI run its office vending machine
, with results that were equal parts unprofitable and impractical.
And a reflection on how a wave of
Chinese technologists moving to Mexico City
has upped the Asian restaurant and supermarket game in the Latin American megalopolis.
Boardroom of the day
Credits: Jacqueline Hassink via the Bonni Benrubi Gallery, Slate
Intrigue loves little more than to wax about the intersection of finance and policy
,
which is why we’ll use this #FlashbackFriday for a look back at Jacqueline Hassink’s 2009 photography collection,
The Table of Power.
It’s the product of her decades exploring Europe’s corporate boardrooms which, at the time, mostly hadn’t been seen by the public. So clockwise from the top left, take a peek at Russia’s Lukoil, ING in the Netherlands, Spain’s Santander, UK’s BP, Royal Dutch Shell in the Netherlands, and France’s BNP Paribas.
Friday quiz
A bookish quiz before you get into your vacation reading list.
1) What's the oldest printed text in the world?
The Diamond Sutra
The Gutenberg Bible
Mirabilia Romae (a guidebook to Rome)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) Which is the world's most translated book?
(excluding religious works)
The Harry Potter series
Pinocchio
The Little Prince
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) Millions of books were used in the construction of a highway in the UK.
True
False
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate