URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/europe-s-good-cop-bad-cop-in-dc-49797cb755a1e556
Title: 🌍 Europe’s good cop / bad cop in DC

Today’s briefing:
— Europe’s good cop / bad cop in DC
— Get a job in baseball intelligence
— World’s funniest ambassadors
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Social media experts reckon our societies are becoming increasingly siloed because of how algorithms are pushing us to consume content. As platforms generate more personalised and curated content, they will further fragment our individual perceptions of reality and the world around us.
Take, for example, my current reality on social media. My algorithms have me figured out so well that all I’ve been pushed this week is content about the ‘Sandwich Man’ of DC protesting lore, replays of races from the World Robot Games finals (which I highly recommend), and some happenings at the White House that just took place.
We’ll be deep diving on one of those issues today, focusing on
Europe’s leaders meeting in DC to talk Ukraine
. Sandwich man and robot games will have to wait.
Number of the day
17.8%
That’s China’s official youth unemployment rate in July, up from 14.5% in June as millions of newly graduated students join the job market.
Another day, another summit
President Trump has now followed up Friday’s Alaska summit by hosting Ukraine’s Zelensky and a phalanx of European leaders (with a Putin phone call along the way).
So here are the four lines you need to know
“I think as a follow-up we would need
probably a quadrilateral meeting
, because when we speak about security guarantees, we speak about the whole security of the European continent” —
Emmanuel Macron, President, France
🇫🇷
Foreign diplomats around DC whisper that President Trump plays good cop with foes and leaves his advisors to play bad cop (it’s vice-versa for allies). But a diplomat with one of the visiting leaders told us a similar strategy is now emerging in Europe’s response:
Some, like the UK’s Starmer, Italy’s Meloni, NATO’s Rutte, and Finland’s Stubbs, play
good cop
, using public bonhomie to create space for a more private push
Others, like France’s Macron, play the
bad cop
, drawing Trump’s occasional ire with public declarations like the one above.
But Macron isn’t alone…
"I can’t imagine that the next meeting will take place without a
ceasefire
, so let’s work on that"
—
Friedrich Merz, Chancellor, Germany
🇩🇪
Germany’s
Merz often
joins Macron out in front, though it’s unclear if Trump heard this ceasefire push: instead, Trump
announced
the next step is a Putin-Zelensky summit. Why?
“I don’t think we need a
ceasefire
”
—
Donald Trump, President, United States
🇺🇸
We’ve flagged the debate around starting with a
ceasefire versus straight to a peace agreement
. In short, many argue skipping the ceasefire just helps Putin, as it forces Ukraine to negotiate under fire, while bogging the West down in Putin’s ‘root causes’.
But the White House is arguing
Trump’s recent deals
(Azerbaijan-Armenia, DRC-Rwanda, India-Pakistan) have all skipped ceasefires, and he’s
pledging
Russo-Ukraine will be next.
As for
the terms
? President Trump is again pushing Ukraine to cede more turf, and that’s nudging Merz and Macron to play bad cop again: nothing about Europe without Europe.
But Trump doesn’t seem moved,
reiterating
we’ll have to get a deal “
as they fight
”.
“
Security guarantees
… must really be very practical, delivering protection on land, in the air, and at sea, and must be developed with Europe’s participation”
—
Volodymyr Zelensky, President, Ukraine
🇺🇦
Zelensky has clearly bounced back from *that* last Oval Office meeting, this time rocking a sharp suit, plenty of gratitude, some
good jokes
(he’s an ex-comedian after all), and even a personal letter from Ukraine’s first lady to Melania Trump.
And while he avoided pushing back with the cameras rolling, he wasn’t afraid to reiterate a point he’s been making since before Putin invaded: without
real security guarantees
for Ukraine, there’s nothing stopping Putin from just regrouping and re-attacking.
But interestingly, when later speaking to Ukrainian journalists in DC, Zelensky seemed relieved by whatever assurances he got from President Trump: “
I can’t go into details, but it’s important that a political decision has been made.
” Word is it might entail a Ukrainian pledge to buy (with European finance) $100B in US weapons.
Intrigue’s Take
Trump has long been open about the fact he wants the
Nobel Peace Prize
, but that’s up to the Norwegian Nobel Committee, which is appointed by the Norwegian parliament, which is of course elected by the Norwegian people.
And while polling suggests folks in
Norway
are mindful of
managing
ties with Russia, there’s no sympathy for Putin’s expansionism or war-mongering. So it’s hard to see the committee rewarding a deal that in turn rewards Putin’s aggression.
And sure, there’ve been Nobel prizes after territorial concessions, but they’re hardly encouraging in context: Teddy Roosevelt became America’s first laureate in 1906 for mediating an end to the
Russia-Japan war
, but those land concessions just helped fuel grievances that bubbled over into WWII, and Stalin ended up taking it all back (and more).
Ditto, the French and German foreign ministers shared the 1926 prize for the
Locarno Treaties
, but those territorial details (and omissions) likewise tugged at loose ends that ended up unravelling back into WWII. The 1978 Camp David Accords are a
little
more encouraging (Israel and Egypt are still speaking), though Sadat and Begin got their prizes after a genuine (if painful) negotiation, more than some raw, imposed coercion.
So maybe one lesson from history is that, unless a treaty addresses the
actual
root causes (Putin’s imperialism), there’s a risk it just ushers in yet another brief Locarno honeymoon.
Sound even smarter:
The Ukrainians also used this latest DC summit to bring up Russia’s seizure of ~20,000 Ukrainian children, including a young girl (Margarita) now held by Russian parliamentarian and Putin ally, Sergey Mironov.
Ukraine also just unveiled a new ‘
flamingo
’ missile claiming a 3,000km (1860mi) range, while its drones just hit Russia’s major Druzhba gas artery into Europe, halting supplies to Kremlin-friendly Hungary and Slovakia (who aren’t happy).
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
The European Correspondent
Stay informed on Europe – in 11 minutes.
Essential stories shaping Europe, delivered to your inbox daily. The European Correspondent delivers independent news from Lisbon to Kyiv, Tbilisi to Reykjavik, told by local journalists who live the stories they cover. We cut through the noise with sharp analysis, compelling data stories, and investigative reports. In just 11 minutes a day, you’ll understand the politics, culture, and social shifts driving Europe forward. No spin. No paywall. Just honest, nonprofit journalism, built for everyone across the globe.
Subscribe for free
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇮🇱
ISRAEL
-
Waiting for an answer.
Hamas has reportedly agreed to an Arab-brokered proposal that’d see it release around half its remaining hostages over two phases during a 60-day truce. It’s apparently based on a US proposal from June. Israel has yet to comment. (
BBC
)
Comment:
Sunday’s large-scale protests in Israel are a reminder that a majority of Israelis now back a war-ending deal with Hamas to free the hostages. But Netanyahu’s response (warning these demonstrations will embolden Hamas and delay progress) is a reminder this latest Arab proposal is not exactly a done deal.
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
We want in.
The Trump Administration is reportedly in talks to buy 10% of struggling US chipmaker Intel, making the government Intel’s single largest shareholder. (
Bloomberg
$)
Comment:
Some degree of greater government involvement is now pretty bipartisan — the reported deal involves converting the firm’s Biden-era grants into equity. The bigger question is whether this will help turn the chipmaker around — DC has long flagged Intel as America’s best (last?) bet for US-owned, home-grown chipmaking.
🇪🇸
SPAIN
-
Soldiers fight fire.
Spain has deployed another 500 soldiers to help respond to deadly wildfires raging across the Iberian Peninsula. (
France24
)
Comment:
Fires have already burned the equivalent of half a million football pitches in Spain this year.
🇨🇩
DR CONGO
-
Peace no more?
The Rwanda-backed ‘M23’ rebel group operating in the Congo’s east has walked away from Qatar-hosted peace talks, accusing the Congolese government of not upholding a previous truce (allegations the Congo is levelling back at M23). The two sides were due to sign a peace deal in Qatar yesterday (Monday). (
BBC
)
Comment:
These Qatar-brokered M23-Congo talks have run in parallel with the US-brokered Rwanda-Congo deal from June.
🇨🇦
CANADA
-
Back to work.
Union leaders for Air Canada’s 10,000 flight attendants have just announced a tentative agreement with the airline, seemingly ending a strike that’s impacted upwards of half a million travellers since late last week. (
CBC
)
🇹🇭
THAILAND
-
Crypto tourism.
The Thai government has announced a program for tourists to convert cryptocurrencies into the local baht, as a way to boost its sagging tourism sector. (
CoinTelegraph
)
🇮🇳
INDIA
-
Signs of a thaw?
The foreign ministers of rivals India (Jaishankar) and China (Wang) have met in Delhi, with Wang also scoring a call on India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi. (
AP
)
Comment:
There’s talk of a China-India thaw in play, but the reality is mutual suspicion runs deep, not just after their infamous high-altitude melee in 2020, but also China’s unabashed role in helping Pakistan spar with India earlier this year.
Extra Intrigue
The Intrigue jobs board
💼
Director, Protective Intelligence @
Major League Baseball
in New York
Transport and Energy Policy Officer
@
BEUC
in Brussels
Geopolitical Intelligence Intern
@
Insight Forward
in the US (remote)
Supply Chain Finance Manager
@
Kraft Heinz
in São Paolo
From our sponsors
Ready To Build Healthier Habits?
Noom blends cutting-edge technology with expert coaching to drive lasting behavior change and sustainable weight loss. Take a 5-minute quiz to unlock a personalized weight loss plan tailored to your needs, helping you manage your health and build habits that stick.
Start your free trial.
Joke of the day
It’s one thing to learn another language. But to then be
funny
in it? Uffff.
So we were delighted to see language-learning gurus (and Intrigue sponsors!) Babbel mark the Edinburgh Fringe Festival by inviting foreign ambassadors in the UK to submit their favourite national jokes. Some of the gems come from…
🇧🇷
Brazil
:
Our country has two seasons: summer… and elections
.
🇸🇰
Slovakia
:
What do Slovaks do when they finally beat England at football? They turn off the PlayStation and go to sleep.
And…
🇨🇭
Switzerland
:
What’s the best thing about living in Switzerland?
Well, the flag is a big plus.
You can check out the whole collection
here
.
Today’s poll
Which country has the best sense of humour?
🇵🇭 Philippines
🇲🇽 Mexico
🇵🇱 Poland
🇪🇬 Egypt
🇮🇪 Ireland
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
What do you think will come of [Monday’s] US summit with Ukraine / Europe?
🤔
President Trump respects several of these leaders; he'll rethink his approach (18%)
😠
Trump is losing patience and will double-down against Ukraine (74%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (8%)
Your two cents:
🤔
K.P.M:
“One can only hope. So far, he's been only too willing to cede Ukrainian territory to reward the aggressor for its violations of international law and human rights. Frankly, Trump has shown little strength in these negotiations.”
😠
C.O:
“Arguments compel Trump - but he is not in control of the outcomes. He’s in a weird zone where peace at any cost is cool with him- but not the warring parties.”
✍️
G:
“It lands in the middle somewhere. Everyone needs to give in somehow to make it work. But at what point does Trump just let go and have EU figure it out themselves?”