URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/europe-s-bonds-are-so-hot-right-now-1d8766038da4541d
Title: 🌍 Europe’s bonds are so hot right now

Today’s briefing:
— Europe’s bonds are so hot right now
— A shock crash in India
— An epic sax solo in Korea
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Long-time Intriguers might recall way back in our early days (hi dad
👋
) we had a regular section that would contrast the way different headlines around the world were framing the same world events.
That same section still exists in our weekly Spanish edition (¡
free to subscribe
!), so I thought you might be interested in how authoritarian rivals are now framing this week’s LA events via their own state outlets:
🇨🇳
“
LA chaos reflects deep-rooted US divisions
”
🇷🇺
“
LA protests reveal population's discontent with US government policies
”
🇰🇵
“
Protesters condemn indiscriminate detaining of people without just cause
”, and
🇮🇷
“
Make America quashed again
”
That’s right — leaving aside how you feeling about these events, China, Russia, North Korea, and Iran are all seizing their moment to a) allege US hypocrisy, b) push a narrative of US division, decay, and decline, and thereby c) curb any curiosity their own people might have about trialling any new-fangled democratic model.
Anyway, let’s take a look at
what’s going on with European bonds
, shall we?
P.S.
- Will you be in
New York
the evening of Monday
June 23rd
? Join us for Intrigue drinks with special guests, hosted by the Czech ambassador to the UN!
RSVP here.
Number of the day
5%
That’s how much Brent prices spiked yesterday (Wednesday) after news broke the US is drawing back its diplomatic presence in Baghdad, as
rumours
swirl around possible imminent US or Israeli strikes on Iranian nuclear facilities now that talks have faltered.
What’s up with European bonds
Move aside US Treasuries, it’s European bonds getting all the attention right now.
You see, it turns out Japan
offloaded
$13B worth of German bonds back in April, even after Friedrich Merz looked set to restore Berlin’s political stability and fiscal sustainability.
Who cares?
One’s care-factor might depend on what drove Japan’s decision to sell:
Does famously long-term Japan no longer see
Germany
as a good bet?
Did Japan just want to free up some
cash
for emerging priorities back home?
Or… might it have something to do with all those sizzling rumours that US trade negotiators are nudging governments to
purchase US bonds
, meaning Tokyo might’ve simply swapped
bunds
for bonds.
It also depends a little on how you view what’s happening in
Italy, Spain, and Greece.
Long the EU’s fiscal bad boys, markets are now suggesting there’s not too much risk-difference between lending to these three versus their thrifty neighbours like Germany.
Italian
bond yields are now <
1% higher than in Germany
(versus a full
5.7% higher
a decade ago)
Spain
has now pushed its borrowing costs below high-fallutin’ France, and
Even
Greece
, once flailing under the frugal gaze of Angela Merkel, is now only facing borrowing costs a tad pricier than those confronting Paris.
What’s going on?
As always with bonds, there are a few drivers in parallel, including…
The European Central Bank’s rate
cuts
, which tend to have bigger impacts at the bloc’s periphery (more liquidity and confidence, lower risk perception)
Those periphery capitals have also done a bang-up job of lowering their
debt
-to-GDP ratios lately, giving investors and lenders more confidence
Giorgia Meloni seems to have cracked the code for
political stability
in Italy, and
The EU’s big spending plans around recovery and security have encouraged fiscal discipline while enabling
joint EU borrowing
(something Berlin resisted for years).
Arguably, the common theme across each driver above is that investors and lenders are now
detecting a moment of cohesion
in Europe.
Sure, Brussels will still be Brussels, and leaders will still roll into town wielding their veto like a stick to periodically jam through the EU’s spokes. But in the big picture, there’s now consensus around how much to spend, how to spend it, and how to finance it (jointly).
So all that to say… maybe Japan’s decision to sell German bonds wasn’t about Germany.
Intrigue’s Take
If we’re now arguably seeing new levels of
EU unity
… why? It’s partly the cumulative result of all the shocks over the past couple of decades, like the debt crisis, Brexit, Covid, Russia’s aggression, and big shifts in US positions around security and trade.
Each new shock has variously inflamed divisions within and between EU members, but at the same time, it’s also forced Europe’s leaders to reassess their
appetite for greater integration
to weather each storm. EU critics long saw each crisis and EU response as proof of the bloc’s eventual decline. And sure, history
might
prove them right.
But these bond movements also hint that
maybe the critics are wrong
: perhaps the EU’s architects didn’t plant the seeds of the bloc’s own demise, but rather built in
just
enough flexibility for the kinds of financial engineering and political manoeuvring necessary not only to adapt to each new shock, but to evolve into a stronger bloc. Maybe.
Sound even smarter:
US Treasury prices rallied and yields dropped yesterday (Wednesday) after cooler US inflation data eased investor worries about the Trump tariffs, while raising hopes for a Fed rate cut by September.
Overheard in the Intrigue chat:
(free to join if you refer 5 friends using your unique link down below!)
“I remember when Macri won, Argentina was able to issue a 100 year bond in US$ in 2017 and how everyone was shocked (even us Argentines).”
- C.G
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇮🇳
INDIA
-
Plane carrying over 200 people crashes.
A UK-bound Air India Boeing 787 Dreamliner has just crashed in an Ahmedabad neighbourhood shortly after take-off, with cause and casualties unclear. It’s the first recorded 787 crash, sending Boeing shares down ~7.5% in pre-market trading. (
Sky
)
🇦🇺
AUSTRALIA
-
US launches AUKUS review.
The Pentagon has announced it’ll review AUKUS, the vaunted Aus-UK-US pact featuring plans to co-develop nuclear-
propelled
submarines. Supporters always argued the multi-decade Biden-era deal was key to counter China, while critics warned it’d spike tensions and/or be overturned by future administrations. (
Politico
)
Comment:
This US announcement will fuel debates in the UK and Australia around the degree to which these allies feel they can rely on long-term US security pledges.
🇵🇱
POLAND
-
Tusk survives confidence vote.
PM Donald Tusk has called (and survived) a confidence vote in his own government after his party’s presidential candidate lost to the populist historian, Karol Nawrocki. The idea was to reassert his own legitimacy, but a 243-210 win is lukewarm. (
AP
)
🇵🇰
PAKISTAN
-
Defence spending explodes.
Islamabad has announced it’ll ramp defence spending up another 20%, while cutting broader government spending by 7%. It comes a few weeks after Pakistan’s clash with India, which is also hiking defence spending by ~10%. (
Al Jazeera
)
Comment
: There’ll be cheers in both Beijing and Moscow, the top arms suppliers for Pakistan and India respectively (the US and France hope to cut Russia’s lunch in India).
🇦🇹
AUSTRIA
-
Country mourns school shooting.
Austria is in three days of mourning after a shooter killed at least nine students in Graz before taking his own life. Authorities are still investigating the motives of the 21-year-old culprit, a former student who seemed to act alone. (
BBC
)
🇮🇩
INDONESIA
-
Save the coral.
Jakarta has revoked the permits of four out of five mining companies operating in the spectacular eastern archipelago of Raja Ampat, after a video went viral targeting the environmental impacts of nickel mining. (
France24
)
Comment
: It’s hard to think of a better story to illustrate a) the power of social media, b) Indonesia’s growth / conservation trade-off, and c) Jakarta’s determination to secure the benefits of its own nickel, a key energy transition input for us all.
🇧🇷
BRAZIL
-
Former president takes the stand.
Former President Jair Bolsonaro finally took the stand on Tuesday, denying his involvement in the capital’s January 2023 unrest that prosecutors say was the precursor to a coup. (
Independent
)
Comment
: Bolsonaro continues to enjoy populist support among Brazilians who see his prosecution as politically-motivated. That leaves little margin of error for the court, just as Brazil prepares to host BRICS and COP climate summits.
🇹🇬
TOGO
-
Can’t touch this.
President Faure Gnassingbé is facing growing protests calling for his resignation after last year’s constitutional amendment allowed him (like his dad) to potentially stay in power forever. He banned demonstrations back in 2022. (
AfricaNews
)
Extra Intrigue
Meanwhile, in other worlds…
Sports
: FIFA will consider
expanding its
Club
World Cup to 48 teams
(up from 32) after lobbying from European clubs that didn’t make the tournament’s first edition, which kicks off in Miami this Sunday.
Space
: An oxygen leak means SpaceX is delaying a launch that would’ve taken the
first Indian astronaut to the International Space Station
.
Art
: A Beijing auction house has sold a
human-sized figure of a Labubu
for $150k (it’s the furry, toothy monster figurine now at the centre of a global frenzy).
Sax solo of the day
Sick solo bro. Anthony Wallace/Agence France-Presse — Getty Images
Why are two service members surrounded by fans? Why are they holding flowers? And why is one absolutely ripping what seems to be a
sick
sax solo, even getting down on one knee to ensure he can really put his back into it?
This, dear reader, is what happens when global stardom meets geopolitics. It’s because four of the seven members of the K-pop supergroup BTS just wrapped their mandatory military service in South Korea, bringing us one step closer to their big reunion tour.
Fun fact
: they’re such an economic and cultural phenomenon that lawmakers actually passed a special 2020 bill allowing them to defer conscription until the age of 30.
Today’s poll
Why do you think European bonds are so hot right now?
🚥 Because there are few other options
🥋 Because EU members have tightened their belts
👪 Because investors sense EU unity
✍️ Other (write us!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think a declining birth rate is a national crisis?
👍 Yep, and the government must act (32%)
🙅
Nope, leave it to individuals (62%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (6%)
Your two cents:
🙅
H.L.B:
“Maybe the government could focus on reducing maternal deaths. Let's try to keep the people who want kids alive rather than pushing kids on the reluctant.”
👍
D.R:
“A stable population is essential for the national future. If individuals aren’t choosing to have kids, the government needs to provide more incentives to start families. #MakeAmericaMateAgain”
✍️
J:
“I’m not sure we have a valid economic system if every country has to have an increasingly larger young base to make the whole thing work. Feels like a pyramid scheme that will break.”