URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/evergrandes-woes-get-worse
Title: 🌍 Evergrande's woes get worse

Today’s newsletter supported by:
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Outta the way, geopolitical analysts! A Washington DC-based pizzeria owner once claimed he was able to
predict US military action
by the fluctuations in late-night deliveries to the Pentagon. More pizza, later at night? Action, imminent.
Today’s briefing is a 4 min read:
🇨🇳
China
’s real estate woes are dizzying.
🚰
Water
is shaping politics in the
Middle East
.
➕
Plus:
A parrot on a flag, how the papers are covering a potential US government shutdown, and why Chileans are googling ‘río atmosférico’.
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇰🇵
North Korea
: Travis King, a US soldier who crossed into North Korea in July, is
back in US custody
. It’s unclear why Pyongyang agreed to the transfer, which was facilitated by Sweden and China.
🇪🇦
Spain
: Opposition leader Alberto Núñez Feijóo
failed by just four votes
in his first bid to become prime minister during a parliamentary vote yesterday (Wednesday). If he or another candidate can’t secure a parliamentary majority within two months, Spaniards will head back to the polls in January.
🇮🇩
Indonesia
: Jakarta is
banning transactions via social media
platforms,
arguing
an influx of foreign goods is harming local small businesses. The policy undercuts the e-commerce ambitions of TikTok, which counts Indonesia as its second-largest market.
🇨🇷
Costa Rica
: President Rodrigo Chaves said Tuesday (26 September) he would declare a
state of emergency
to address the influx of migrants transiting through the country. Over 60,000 migrants have entered Costa Rica so far in September.
🇰🇪
Kenya
: The US and Kenya
signed a defence agreement
earlier this week (25 September) ahead of a planned deployment of Kenyan forces to Haiti. Under the five-year deal, the US will provide $100M in funding to support the mission.
🇨🇳
China | Geo-economics
China’s real estate woes worsen
The Hong Kong Stock Exchange today (Thursday)
announced
the suspension of trade for shares in China Evergrande Group, the world’s most indebted property developer.
What’s going on?
The real estate sector makes up 24% of China’s GDP, and it’s been in trouble for a while now.
For years, developers there were pre-selling homes, leveraging the cash from one project to start building others. But Beijing tapped the brakes on excess borrowing in 2020, and the music stopped: buying slowed, prices stalled, and Evergrande started defaulting on its $300B+ debt the next year.
📉
Condo prices have since been
dropping
🚜
Excavator sales
(which track construction) are down 42% on the year, and
💸
Property stocks in China have
hit their lowest
since 2011.
So, what’s Beijing doing about it?
It launched a
16-point program
to help ailing firms last year
It’s
relaxed mortgage rules
for first-time homeowners, and
It even
arrested
several Evergrande employees this month, and placed the founder under police
surveillance
this weekend.
Meanwhile, Evergrande and
others
are still missing debt repayments, and the world continues to wonder if there’s a “Lehman moment” on the horizon.
Intrigue's take:
Folks in China (like everywhere else) have a chunk of their savings tied to their homes. And construction in China (like almost every other sector there) hoovers up global inputs. So trouble there can mean trouble everywhere.
German economist Isabella Weber made waves with her
2021 book
on China’s unique (if imperfect) history of navigating economic challenges. But this latest challenge feels unique in its complexity, and the most promising solutions (like direct cash transfers to households) have political implications.
That’s partly what’s tying Beijing’s hands right now.
Also worth noting:
Evergrande faces a
hearing in a Hong Kong court
next month that could potentially result in its liquidation.
📰
How newspapers covered…
A possible US government shutdown
Singapore
“Duelling US Senate, House views on funding raise likelihood of government shutdown”
Kyiv, Ukraine
“Official: Potential US Government shutdown could put Ukraine aid at risk”
Tokyo, Japan
“Asian shares dip with eyes on Chinese economy and possible U.S. shutdown”
Today’s newsletter is supported by: Nautilus
Do you seek to understand the answers to the biggest questions in science?
How did we get here? Where are we going? Are we alone in the universe?
Join over 150,000 curious subscribers of the Nautilus newsletter, where you'll find cutting-edge science unraveled by the very brightest living thinkers in award-winning journalism.
Subscribe for free today
🚰
Israel - UAE - Jordan |
Energy & climate
Israel’s got what Jordan needs
Israel’s
energy ministry announced
on Tuesday (26 September) it’s finalising a trilateral energy-for-water deal with the UAE and Jordan.
The plan (‘
Project Prosperity
’) emerged out of COP26 in 2021, and has two parts:
🟢
Prosperity Green
:
Israel will receive clean energy from a UAE-funded solar facility in Jordan, and
🔵
Prosperity Blue:
Jordan will receive 200 billion litres of desalinated water from Israel each year.
Intrigue’s take:
Sometimes geopolitics is complicated. In this case, it’s kinda simple: people need water. Jordan doesn’t have much (it’s the second most water-scarce country on Earth); and Israel produces
20% more
water than it needs.
So
no matter how frustrated
Jordan is with this Israeli government, and
no matter how frustrated
Jordanians are with this deal, Jordan is pushing ahead. It needs to.
Sometimes
water drives conflict
. For Israel and its neighbours, it seems to be driving cooperation right now.
Also worth noting:
The energy ministry said it expects to formally sign the agreement at COP28 in Dubai in November.
Jordan is currently moving to build a
major desalination plant
at its only port city, Aqaba, that’s expected to be operational by 2028.
➕
Extra Intrigue
Here’s what folks around the world googled yesterday, Wednesday 27 September:
🇦🇺
Australians
looked up ‘
Google's 25th birthday
’ as the tech giant racked up its
quarter century
.
🇨🇱
People in
Chile
googled ‘
Río atmosférico
’ (
atmospheric river
), the weather phenomenon that’s been swamping central Chile.
🇵🇱
And
Poles
searched for ‘
kidult
’ (
kid adult
), a term that appeared in a question on the
local version
of TV’s
Who Wants to Be a Millionaire
.
🗳️ Poll time!
What's some intriguing music from around the world we should check out?
🇧🇷 Pássaro
🇲🇱 Fatoumata Diawara
🇩🇪 Jembaa Groove
🇨🇳-🇦🇺 Mindy Meng Wang
🇮🇷 Kourosh Yaghmaei
🇬🇧 United Freedom Collective
🇿🇦 Sun-El Musician
🇺🇾 Sofía Alvez
🇮🇱 Dudu Tassa
✍️ (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
🏁
Flag of the day
The Caribbean island nation of Dominica is proud of its luscious forests, represented in the green background above. But while several flags feature birds, Dominica’s banner is the only one rocking a parrot. And you can never have too many parrots.
Intrigue rating
: 9.8/10
Yesterday’s poll:
What do you think of carbon trading schemes?
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🎯
They're critical to the world hitting net zero (8%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️
💡
They're good in theory, but so messy in practice (37%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
💸
They're just wealth transfer by another name (54%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!) (2%)
Your two cents
:
🎯
E:
“They help internalize externalities so in theory they're key to fixing climate change. I'm unsure if the reality is the same but I still champion carbon credits as an important part of the green energy transition.”
💸
S.M:
“Without actually doing something to lower the emissions, this is pointless. It’s just one rich company that is doing less damage selling their additional credits to gain more money and allow the big offenders (who probably have millions to spend anyway) to keep destroying our planet.”