URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/first-republic-bank-gets-swept-spring-sale
Title: 🌍 First Republic Bank gets swept up in Spring sale

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
A fun fact for you on this fine Tuesday: folks in Spain
never
sing their national anthem. It’s not that they’re shy or unpatriotic. It’s just that there’s nothing to sing: the
Marcha Real
has been inspiring Spaniards since 1770, but it’s one of four anthems in the world with no official lyrics.
Today’s briefing is a 4.4 min read:
🏦
Another
US bank
gets seized and sold.
🇵🇾
A Taiwan-friendly candidate wins in
Paraguay
.
➕
Plus:
The legacy of genocide still looms in Rwanda, how the papers are covering the upcoming Thai elections, and the fugitive princesses of Dubai.
🗺️ AROUND THE WORLD
🇺🇿
Uzbekistan
: President Shavkat Mirziyoyev has
won a referendum
to extend his rule for two more seven-year terms. Despite a slew of recent reforms, observers say the Central Asian country remains authoritarian.
🇻🇦
Vatican
: Pope Francis has said the Vatican is involved in a
secret “peace mission”
to help return Ukrainian children from Russia. The Holy See has negotiated prisoner returns in recent months and has sought to establish itself as a reliable mediator in the conflict.
🇵🇭
Philippines
: President Ferdinand Marcos Jr. is in the US to
meet President Joe Biden
as tensions with Beijing escalate in the South China Sea. The latest incident involved a near collision between Philippine and Chinese vessels last month.
🇨🇺
Cuba
: Havana
cancelled its mass annual parade
for International Workers’ Day yesterday (Monday) due to fuel shortages. It’s the first time since the 1959 revolution that Cuba has cancelled the event for economic reasons.
🇳🇪
Niger
: The German parliament has approved the
deployment of sixty troops to Niger,
where they’ll join an EU logistics mission. The development counters a wider regional trend calling for the reduced military presence of European powers.
🏦
US | BANKING CRISIS
First Republic went under, despite recent efforts to storm-proof the bank
Is the US banking crisis over?
Briefly:
US regulators
seized control
of First Republic Bank early yesterday (Monday) and struck a deal to sell the majority of its assets to JP Morgan Chase. That makes First Republic the second-largest bank to collapse in US history.
It also means three of the four largest bank collapses in US history
have taken place since March. And like the last two failed banks (
Silicon Valley Bank and Signature Bank
), First Republic had a pretty niche approach to banking:
💁
It catered to wealthy clients
💰 It often enticed them with huge, cheap mortgages, and
📈
Its wealthy clients often had bank balances that far exceeded the $250K protected by the US government’s deposit insurance agency
It all worked pretty well
, until the Fed started raising rates to tame inflation: this triggered the bank failures in March, and led First Republic to start losing money on its cheap mortgages. So its customers fled for fear of losing their uninsured cash, and the bank wasn’t able to cover all their withdrawals.
The final straw was last week, when First Republic disclosed that $102B (more than
half
its deposits) had fled since late 2022. It was a classic bank run.
Intrigue’s take
:
The US is home to 4,100 banks, more than the next
~20 countries
combined. So the odd collapse does feel inevitable. And when a bank teeters, Washington’s standard options are either:
Offer some kind of guarantee to control the damage, but ignite a political firestorm over ‘bailouts’
Ask a big bank to buy the ailing bank, but ignite a political firestorm about them getting ‘too big to fail’, or
Do neither, but burn the bank’s customers and risk broader contagion.
Washington went with option #1 in March and option #2 this week, and the fallout has been pretty foreseeable so far. Option #3 is politically less likely these days, but if that changes, things can quickly get very volatile and very global.
Also worth noting:
JP Morgan CEO
Jamie Dimon told analysts
that
“there may be another smaller [bank collapse] but… this part of the crisis is over.”
The state of North Dakota (population: 775,000) has
more banks than Canada
(population: 38.2 million).
📰
GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES
How different newspapers covered
: The upcoming Thai general election.
Links
:
The Straits Times
,
Al Jazeera
,
CNN
.
Today’s briefing is sponsored by
monogram
This Doctor Performed Surgical Demo In Austin…While In NYC
Dr. Doug Unis founded Monogram to make more precise, personalized surgery a reality in the future with the first active navigated sagittal cutting robot.
Years of manual cutting and one-size-fits-all implants haven’t always produced the same quality result – in fact, as many as 100,000 joint surgeries fail every year.
More personalized surgery could change that.
With 20 patents, it’s already performed a remote demo surgery from New York to Texas. The last day to fund your investment is 5/10.
Invest in Monogram before their intended Nasdaq listing.
🇵🇾
PARAGUAY | POLITICS
Santiago Peña is now the President-Elect of Paraguay and will take office in August
Pro-Taiwan party wins re-election in Paraguay
Briefly:
Economist Santiago Peña
won Paraguay’s presidential election
on Sunday, easily trumping his centre-left competitor. In doing so, he:
extended his conservative party’s enduring dominance of local politics
hit pause on the recent ‘pink tide’ that’s washed over Latin America, and
broke a streak of election losses for incumbent parties in Latin America.
But Peña’s now got quite the presidential in-tray waiting for him
:
Revive Paraguay’s farm-driven economy
Reduce the country’s fiscal deficit, and
Tackle corruption (the US
just sanctioned
his mentor, an ex-president)
Intrigue’s take:
Did you notice that soft breeze on Sunday night? It was a collective sigh of relief coming in from Taiwan.
Unlike his main opponent, Peña had promised to maintain Paraguay’s relations with Taiwan, resisting pressure from an influential farming lobby that’s eager to recognise Beijing and tap China’s vast markets.
Also worth noting:
Paraguay imports
more from China
than anywhere else.
Only
13 countries now officially recognise Taiwan
. Paraguay is the last one left in South America.
👀
EXTRA INTRIGUE
We’re very online, so you don’t have to be.
‘The Godfather of A.I.’ is worried about what he’s built
As fentanyl crisis grows, U.S.-Mexico divide deepens
($)
The fugitive princesses of Dubai
Is Sikh separatism on the rise in India?
The case for the total liberation of Ukraine
($)
💬
QUOTE OF THE DAY
Rwandan opposition leader Victoire Ingabire was imprisoned for almost a decade while running for president, but that hasn’t stopped her. Victoire shared her remarkable story with us on
Spotify
,
Apple Podcasts
, and
beyond
.
🗳️ POLL TIME!
Do you think the banking crisis is over?
🤓 Yes, at least the worst of it
🤕 No, it's just warming up
✍️ Other (write-in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll: Do you think having an oil exec chair the upcoming COP summit is a good idea?
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️
💚
Yes, the green transition can't happen without Big Oil (25%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🙅
No, the conflict of interest undermines the whole conference (44%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️
🤔
Things are more complicated than that (31%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!) (0.4%)
Your two cents:
🙅
T.F:
“It’s nothing short of scandalous on an apocalyptic scale. Why not just let Putin run for US president while we're at it.”
🤔
G.L:
“Having an oil exec as the chair seems like a conflict of interest, but excluding Big Oil from these conferences is also a mistake. Big Oil needs to have a presence in the decision-making without completely dictating the discussion.”
In other news
, our co-founder John is in LA today and tomorrow (Tuesday and Wednesday),
so shoot him a note
if you’d like to catch up for one of those overpriced LA-style turmeric matcha lattes with nut milk.