URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/five-wild-spy-stories
Title: 🌍 Five wild spy stories

Today’s briefing:
— Five wild spy stories
— Go work for OpenAI in Brussels
— Good first impression(ist)
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. I loved this anecdote shared by an Intriguer about the absurdities of diplomat life:
There was once a foreign ministry who wouldn’t meet us unless our embassy had first faxed our visit request to the local security office. But more than once, we’d arrive and they’d have no record of our request, plus wouldn’t accept the copy we brought with us. So, we’d just head around the corner to the local office supply store, fax our copy from there, then return and ask the security folks to check again. And wouldn’t you know it? They’d let us in.
Hah. Anyway, today’s cracker of a briefing gets you the latest on
some wild spy stories
.
Number of the day
200
That’s how many of China’s low-cost tyre brands are reportedly now available across Russia, triggering panic across an already-weakened local industry. But given Russia’s growing dependence on China, it’s hard to see Moscow doing much about it.
Top secret
It’s Friday and we burnt all our brainpower on the week’s briefings, so you don’t get a witty intro. But you do get a wrap of the most intriguing intelligence stories, starting with…
Von der Leyen’s new secret service
What do you buy the woman who’s already got it all: a medical degree, seven kids, competitive horse-riding cred, years as defence minister in Germany, and then scaling all the way to the tippy top of European politics as Commission President?
There’s
only one thing left
: Ursula von der Leyen reportedly wants her own intelligence unit, using data from EU member state spooks to harmonise Europe’s mixed security posture amid a worsening security outlook.
But of course, not everyone’s buying it.
First
, her critics argue it’s just a power grab.
Second
, it duplicates (and undermines) a unit already reporting to the bloc’s top diplomat Kaja Kallas. And
third
, behind the bonhomie, EU members are still cautious about what intel they share, particularly given some of the Moscow-friendly politicians in Europe’s mix.
South Korea’s spy chief arrested
Police detained former spymaster Cho Tae-yong on Wednesday, as the fallout from South Korea’s
wild 2024 attempted self-coup
continues to play out. Basically the allegation is Cho — a former diplomat who led Seoul’s intelligence service until June — played a role in then-president Yoon’s unlawful attempt to declare martial law last year.
Cho denies knowing anything, but
CCTV footage
of him pocketing a draft of Yoon’s illegal decree is a bad look. So police have hauled him in on fears he might destroy evidence.
France’s ex-spy chief on trial
This could be
the most French spy story ever
: it turns out the legendary
Direction Générale de la Sécurité Extérieure
(DGSE, of
The Bureau
fame) got assigned a secret ‘war chest’ by none other than General de Gaulle, funded via WWI reparations — the idea is to keep the DGSE financially independent so it can keep operating if France gets invaded.
But rather than leave that cash to wither in a bank, the agency invested a chunk of it to generate returns. And rather than invest it in something boring like an index, the DGSE invested some of it in…
a French luxury group!
And yet the guy they entrusted to manage this ritzy investment allegedly embezzled the agency’s cash instead!
So what did the DGSE do? Two operatives detained the alleged fraudster at Charles de Gaulle Airport and
scared the sh!t out of him
by showing surveillance pics of his family.
Bernard Bajolet was the DGSE chief at the time (2016), and denies allegations he was complicit in the airport incident. A court verdict is now TBC, but prosecutors aren’t seeking any jailtime or even a criminal record given his reputation as a “
great servant of the state
”.
Still, it’s an insight into the DGSE’s murky finances and operational autonomy, just as the agency faces criticism for failing to anticipate Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, Australia’s ditching of a lucrative subs deal, plus coups in former colonies like Mali and Niger.
Foiled in Canada!
Canada’s new spymaster
Tim Hortons
Dan Rogers used his first
speech
to drop a few intriguing revelations, including that his agency has thwarted
a
) Iranian attempts to silence local critics,
b
) Russian attempts to smuggle Canadian tech and weapons,
c
) China-linked attempts to recruit spies via LinkedIn, and even
d
) hostile spying efforts in the Arctic.
And lastly, speaking of China…
The spy who got away
Back in April, Serbian authorities arrested two mysterious gents at the Hyatt just as they were due to board a flight to China: one was US-based British businessman John Miller, and the other was his presumed handler for Chinese intelligence, Cui Guanghai.
US authorities
allege
the pair had tried to both
a
) silence a dissident LA artist ahead of President Xi’s 2023 visit to California, and
b
) smuggle sensitive US military tech to China (everything from missile launchers to cryptographic machines).
But then
something strange happened
: around 1am on August 4th, their court-mandated electronic tags broke, and the two vanished from their Belgrade house arrest.
Now the
Balkan Investigative Reporting Network
(BIRN) has
revealed
(
🇷🇸
) the two men
fled to China immediately aboard a waiting private jet
!
Exfiltrating your operatives and sources is tricky, but we’re guessing China’s years of building influence in Serbia will have provided a few levers in this case.
Intrigue’s Take
They say diplomacy careers get better, whereas intelligence careers get worse.
For diplomats
, the higher up the food chain you go, the less time you waste getting activated almonds for the minister, and the more time you spend doing the stuff you dreamed of: negotiating treaties, helping compatriots, and getting driven around town in one of those cool diplomatic vehicles with a little flag fluttering up front.
For spies
, it’s almost the reverse: the higher up the food chain you go, the less time you spend wearing disguises for your brush passes, dead-letter drops, stingray intercepts, and basement meetings, and the more time you spend dealing with legal and HR back at HQ.
Anyway, we hope you’ve enjoyed this sneak peek behind the veil.
Sound even smarter:
Bonus spy story
: Thai authorities just detained a mysterious 35-year-old Russian citizen at a resort in Phuket for possible US extradition. Word is it might be Aleksey Lukashev, the notorious Unit 26165 hacker from Russia’s military intelligence (GRU), wanted by the FBI for cybercrimes during the 2016 US election.
Remember, we once interviewed fellow Intriguer, former French DGSE operative, and now best-selling spy novelist
Jack Beaumont
— you can read our chat with Jack just by referring Intrigue to a friend using your unique link down below!
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇬🇧
UNITED KINGDOM — Sorry.
Public broadcaster BBC has apologised to President Trump over a misleading edit to the president’s January 6th remarks, saying it “
gave the mistaken impression that President Trump had made a direct call for violent action
”. (
ABC
)
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES — No news is bad news?
The White House has cited the recent government shutdown as the reason why October’s jobs report won’t include the US unemployment rate. (
The Hill
)
Comment:
We might see this delayed report as soon as next week, with most Wall St surveys expecting a sharp drop in payrolls. Data gaps could complicate the Fed’s next rates meeting on December 9, though realistically the Fed has no shortage of data to triangulate what’s happening in the US economy.
🇨🇳
CHINA — An unusual request.
Banks in China are quietly asking clients to take out loans then immediately repay them, in a “
quick-lend-and-recover
” practice aimed at
appearing
to hit the government’s ambitious pro-growth lending targets. (
Bloomberg
$)
Comment:
It’s more evidence China is in a classic balance-sheet recession: make loans as easy as you want, but it doesn’t address the fact that a deflationary spiral means folks would rather pay off existing loans than take out new ones.
🇮🇹
ITALY — We’ll have what they’re having.
Italy plans to introduce a tax on low-value parcels from ✌️non-EU countries✌️ (aka China), mirroring recent US moves aimed at shielding local businesses from ultra-cheap goods on platforms like Shein and Temu. The broader EU says it’s working on something similar. (
SCMP
)
Comment:
These sorts of quiet shifts will continue to happen around the world — not so much because of sustained US pressure for capitals to close ranks on China, but because domestic industries are now feeling the brunt of China’s vast over-capacity.
🇳🇺
NIUE
— Howdy neighbour.
Dalton Tagelagi, the prime minister of the Pacific Island nation of Niue (pop: less than 2,000!), has been in New Zealand this week to sign the first NZ-Niue “
foundational political declaration
”. (
The Straits Times
)
Comment:
Intriguers will recall Kiwis
got a fright
earlier this year when the Cook Islands suddenly signed a murky pact with China. So NZ is now (like Australia) hustling to sign pacts with its neighbours to avoid more repeats across the Pacific.
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES — Back to bite you.
The folks at Reuters are reporting that a secret 50-page memo out of the US Justice Department has endorsed President Trump’s strikes on alleged narco-boats as lawful — according to the memo, everyone in the relevant chain of command therefore enjoys battlefield immunity for complying with lawful orders. (
Reuters
)
Comment:
The memo reportedly relies on the White House’s own assertions to conclude that the US is technically in a state of war with the cartels, dismissing criticism that, as bad as these groups are, they’re not typically engaging in the kinds of armed attacks necessary to create a state of war.
🇳🇬
NIGERIA — Scratch that.
Nigeria is pulling an Uno reverse on early schooling in indigenous languages, after the education minister argued the program has failed to deliver results. Relevant kids will now revert immediately to English-language classes. (
BBC
)
Extra Intrigue
The Intrigue jobs board
Manager, Physical Security Systems & Technology @
Vast
in Long Beach, California
Europe National Security Lead, Global Affairs
@
OpenAI
in Brussels
Director of Advocacy, Campaigns, Communications and Media
@
Save the Children
in Ramallah
Opportunity of the day
Credits: DLR
The European Space Agency and Germany’s Aerospace Center (DLR) are recruiting for
SOLIS100
, a spaceflight isolation study that’ll lock six folks in a simulated space station at DLR’s advanced envihab facility in Cologne, from April to August next year.
The idea is to test for the kinds of deeper-space missions Europe might join via its partnership with NASA’s Artemis program, for example. We say “
might
” because Artemis has been plagued with problems.
Anyway, if you’re keen to really avoid that clingy ex, you’ll need strong English, solid fitness, and a bachelor’s degree, with bonus points if you’re handy with medicine or code. Survive the full 126-day program and you’ll walk away with a cool $27k.
Friday Quiz
Today (Friday) is the late Claude Monet’s birthday, so let’s test your knowledge…
Claude Monet is considered the father of
Impressionism
Realism
Cubism
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
His Nymphéas series included how many paintings of water lilies?
~20
~100
~250
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
He was famously buddies with which other French great?
Matisse
Renoir
Cézanne
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
✍️
Editor’s corner
Here’s the finalised graph showing the updated Turkey salary information, from our 2025 Diplomat Salary Report.