URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/french-protests-macrons-pension-reforms
Title: 🌍 French protests over Macron's pension reforms

Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
It’s shaping up to be a yuuuuge week: Chinese President Xi lands in Moscow today for talks that will dominate at least a few news cycles; Credit Suisse looks to have
finally
kicked the bucket (which is Swiss for being bailed out by UBS); and former US President Trump claims he’s about to be arrested. And that just gets us through to Tuesday.
Today’s briefing is a 4.8 min read:
🇫🇷
Protestors continue to clash with police in
France
.
🇷🇺
The ICC issues an arrest warrant for
Russian
president Putin.
➕
Plus:
Oil prices are down, how the papers are covering Xi Jinping’s visit to Russia, and Australia’s at war (with birds)
(again)
.
- Valentina, Ethan and Jeremy
🎧
Today’s Intrigue Outloud:
Go deeper into the protests in Paris, plus the attempts to arrest a former prime minister in Pakistan.
Listen here
🗺️ AROUND THE WORLD
🇹🇼
Taiwan
: Former President Ma
will visit China
this month, the first time any Taiwanese leader (former or current) has visited the mainland since the defeated Republic’s leaders retreated to Taiwan in 1949.
🇸🇰
Slovakia
: Following Poland’s lead, Slovakia is sending more than a dozen
Soviet-era Mig-29 warplanes
to Ukraine. To date, most NATO allies have worried that delivering fighter jets could lead to escalation.
🇻🇳
Vietnam
: A court has sentenced a 60-year-old Facebook user to two years in prison for
attempting to ‘overthrow the state’
. Authorities used a controversial press freedom law to arrest him.
🇧🇴
Bolivia
: The credit ratings agency Fitch
downgraded Bolivia’s credit rating
to a B-minus. Bolivia is dangerously low on foreign reserves, despite the country’s central bank consistently using the hashtag #WeAreAStableCountry (in Spanish) on Twitter.
🇲🇿
Mozambique
: Police fired tear gas and rubber bullets at protestors planning a march in
honor
of an anti-government rapper
named Azagaia, who died of a seizure last week. Azagaia’s 2017 song “Povo No Poder” (Power to the People) was censored across state media.
🇫🇷
FRANCE | PROTESTS
Credit: Reuters
Protestors continue to clash with police in Paris
Briefly:
French protestors continued to rally over the weekend after President Macron's government pushed controversial pension reforms through without a vote.
France is 'ageing'
. This doesn't mean everyone's watching more Matlock, it means folks are living longer and having fewer kids. So there are now fewer workers paying into the pension fund, and more retirees drawing it down. And that’s unsustainable.
But who should fix this?
Macron’s critics say France should instead tax the wealthy or get firms to make more pension contributions. But taxing the rich is like nailing
jello
foie gras to the wall - and when you make it more expensive for companies to hire people, companies tend to hire fewer people.
It’s the seventh time France has attempted pension reform since the 1980s, when President Mitterrand
cut
the retirement age to 60. President Sarkozy then jacked it back up to 62 in 2010. And Macron has long campaigned on raising it further to 64. Now he’s actually doing it.
France isn’t the only country dealing with an ageing population.
Japan is trying to re-balance its demographics by
encouraging more women
to work.
Korea has spent $200B
trying to get couples to have more babies. In Australia and the US, young immigrants have helped slow the ageing process.
Intrigue’s take:
What's really notable in France is how much this issue has fired up both the far right (some would include Marine Le Pen in that)
and
the far left (there’s a French Communist Party, and it’s not happy).
Macron’s government will likely survive the no-confidence vote scheduled for today (Monday). And if he gets his way, his legacy will be a more sustainable pension system. But if Macron doesn’t get his way, his legacy could well be a more radicalised and polarised France.
Also worth noting:
Striking garbage workers have left more than 10,000 tonnes of trash rotting in the streets of Paris, but they’re still letting some garbage trucks through to incinerators
"to limit the risk of an epidemic"
.
Two thirds of French people oppose Macron’s reforms, and his
popularity has plummeted
to just 28%, the lowest in four years.
📰
GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES
How different newspapers covered
: Xi Jinping’s visit to Russia.
Links
:
ABC
,
Xinhua
,
AP News.
Today’s briefing is sponsored by
Highland Titles
If you’re looking for an internationally intriguing gift, check this out!
Lawmakers in Scotland legally recognised ‘souvenir’ plots of land in 1979. These gift-sized plots of land can be bought and sold with ease.
Highland Titles has been selling these plots since 2006, inviting customers to style themselves as Lord or Lady of their ‘estate’.
The land is managed as a nature reserve, and thousands of people find their plots yearly! Prices from less than $50.
Use discount code INTRIGUE for 20% off!
🇷🇺
RUSSIA | ICC
The ICC has issued an arrest warrant for Vladimir Putin.
Putin is now wanted by the ICC
Briefly:
The International Criminal Court (ICC)
issued a warrant for the arrest of Vladimir Putin
on Friday. Both the Russian President and Russian children's rights commissioner Maria Lvova-Belovaare are wanted in connection with the unlawful deportation of Ukrainian children to Russia, which constitutes a war crime under the Fourth Geneva Convention.
At least
6,000 Ukrainian children
have been sent to facilities across Russian-occupied Crimea and Russia since the invasion.
But Putin’s not getting arrested any time soon:
Kremlin Spokesman Dmitry Peskov described the ICC’s warrant as “outrageous and unacceptable”, and reminded everyone that Russia’s not actually an ICC member.
Intrigue’s take:
Peskov is distracting from the real issue, which is precisely what he’s paid to do. Nobody’s expecting Russia to suddenly realise the errors of its ways and hand its president over for a war crimes trial in The Hague. But that doesn’t mean the ICC’s arrest warrant is pointless:
It stains Russia with the implicit condemnation of the ICC’s 123 members.
It isolates Putin because all ICC members now have an obligation to detain him if he enters their territory.
And it encourages Putin’s enemies at home (see next point).
Nobody (including us) expects Putin behind bars any time soon. But nobody expected to see former Serbian president Slobodan Milošević there either. Then a popular uprising toppled his regime, and Milošević was sitting in a Dutch jail a few months later.
What we’re saying is, history’s full of plot twists.
Also worth noting:
Russia isn’t the only major country that’s not an ICC signatory. Others include the US, China, India and Ukraine.
Meanwhile, Vladimir Putin paid a ‘surprise’ visit to occupied Mariupol in Ukraine; “[h]e has come in person to see what he has done”, Mariupol's Ukrainian mayor in exile Vadym Boychenko
told the BBC
.
👀
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Monday funday:
Australia’s
at war with birds
, again. But this time it’s not ostriches, it's a small invasive species of Corella cockatoos.
Netflix-famous Joe Exotic, aka ‘The Tiger King’, has announced his
2024 presidential bid
from prison. A reality TV star who’s had trouble with the law running for President? Absurd!
A 46-year old project manager will
walk the London marathon backwards
to raise money for Ukraine.
New archaeological works in Egypt have uncovered a
small sphinx with a “smiley face and two dimples”
- a nice change from all the other stony-faced statues.
📊
CHART OF THE DAY
Credits: Financial Times.
What goes up...
Benchmark crude oil prices have decreased by 15% in little more than a week as the ongoing Silicon Valley Bank and Credit Suisse dramas spook global markets.
Who do you think is right in France?
🏰 President Macron: France's generous pension system is going broke, and something needs to be done
✊ The protestors: sure, fix the pension system, but don't send the bill to the workers
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Thursday’s poll:
Do you think there's still value in Russia recovering the wreckage of the US drone?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
💽
Yes, to study the drone's tech (46%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 🎞️ Yes, to see what the US was gathering intelligence on (8%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️
✊
Yes, as a symbolic f* you gesture (38%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🤷
No, its drives were wiped remotely then fried by water (8%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 🖋️ Other (write in!) (1%)
Your two cents:
🤷
G.L:
“After 20 years of War in Afghanistan it would be naïve to think the Russians have never seen the insides of an MQ-9. This is not the first Remotely Piloted Aircraft (RPA) to crash.”
🖋️
D.M:
“Considering this contributes to already high tensions, despite us being past this probably, it would be a good gesture to leave it and allow the US or allies to recover the remains.”