URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/g7-foreign-ministers-united-ever
Title: 🌍 G7 foreign ministers “more united than ever”

Today’s newsletter supported by:
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
A quick reminder that we’ve partnered with some of our favourite newsletters to offer readers a $2000 cash giveaway. What’s in it for us? Why, new subscribers to whom we can spread the good Intrigue word, of course! Support your favourite newsletter
and
win some cash here!
Today’s briefing is a 5 min read:
🤝
Highlights from this year’s
G7 foreign ministers’ meeting
.
🌱
You asked: What are the alternatives to
COP
?
➕
Plus:
How the papers are covering US Secretary of State Blinken’s South Korea trip, the Berlin Wall fell 34 years ago, and why folks in Austria are googling the Coca-Cola truck.
📢
Reminder:
We’ll be off for our annual team retreat this weekend, which means there’ll
be no briefing tomorrow, Monday or Tuesday.
We’ll see you back here on Wednesday 15 November.
Share the love!
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇹🇼
Taiwan
: Joseph Wu, Taiwan’s foreign minister, began a
visit to the Baltic countries
on Wednesday. Taiwan has a diplomatic office in Lithuania and plans to open another in Estonia, which China warned would violate Tallinn’s
“solemn commitment to the 'One China' principle.”
🇦🇱
Albania:
Italy and Albania signed an agreement this week to
build detention centres
to house migrants attempting to travel across the Adriatic Sea to Italy. The EU questioned the arrangement’s legality, and one
Italian politician
described the facilities as “
Italy’s Guantanamo.
”
🇱🇰
Sri Lanka
: The US will help build a
$553M shipping container terminal
in Sri Lanka’s Port of Colombo, according to the US Development Finance Corporation. The agency’s CEO said the money reflected the
“high priority for the United States to be active in the Indo-Pacific region.”
🇨🇱
Chile
: Voters will go to the polls on 17 December to
vote on a new constitution
. This draft constitution has been described by opponents as ‘too conservative’ and follows the rejection of a ‘progressive’ constitution last September.
🇸🇾
Syria
: At least thirty pro-government forces stationed at various outposts in the Syrian desert were reportedly killed by
ISIS fighters in an ambush
overnight. The group also claimed responsibility for a bus bombing in Kabul late Tuesday night.
🤝
G7 | Geopolitics
For those who need a refresh, the G7 is Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the UK, and the US (the EU got an invite this time as well). Credit: Japan MoFA.
G7 foreign ministers “more united than ever”
Foreign ministers from the G7 countries met in Japan for talks on Tuesday and Wednesday of this week. As always,
the meeting produced a fairly impenetrable
joint statement
laying out the G7’s foreign policy priorities in a numbered list.
We’ve unscrambled some of the ‘highlights’ for you:
🇮🇱
-
🇵🇸
Israel / Gaza:
The war was the first issue addressed this year, whereas “
Russia’s war of aggression against Ukraine
” topped the
2022
and
2021
communiqués. The G7 ministers expressed support for “
humanitarian pauses and corridors
” but stopped short of calling for a ceasefire. All member states condemned Hamas’ terror attacks on Israel, but some disagreement remains on how far to push Israel amid
the escalating civilian death toll
.
🇺🇦
On Ukraine:
The foreign ministers reiterated that their countries’
support for Ukraine “
will never waver
”. This language is aimed at reassuring Kyiv after Italian Prime Minister Giorgia Meloni was
caught saying in September
“
[t]here is a lot of fatigue, we [are] near the moment in which everybody understands that we need a way out
”.
🇨🇳
On China:
The ministers doubled down on the idea that the West is “
de-risking and diversifying
” from China rather than “
decoupling or turning inwards
”. The statement’s language wasn’t all conciliatory: “
We will seek to address the challenges posed by China’s non-market policies and practices, which distort the global economy. We will counter malign practices, such as illegitimate technology transfer
”. It took a while, but it seems G7 countries have settled on a common rhetorical playbook.
🇦🇿
-
🇦🇲
On Central Asia
: This year’s statement dedicated significantly more attention to the region because of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict. Interestingly, the communiqué focused first on building trade and investment links before urging “
Azerbaijan to fully comply with its obligations under international humanitarian law
”. G7 countries are probably trying to tread lightly around a conflict they’ve historically had little involvement with.
🇮🇷
On Iran:
The G7 was robust in its assessment of Iran as a bad actor in the Middle East. The statement criticised Iran’s support for Hamas and Hezbollah, reiterated that Tehran must never acquire a nuclear weapon, expressed concern about the human rights situation inside Iran, and called out Iran’s destabilising activities in general. It was pretty strong stuff from the foreign ministers.
Intrigue's take:
A good rule of thumb is the more generic and vague a post-summit joint statement is, the more disagreement there was behind the scenes. And there will no doubt have been robust debates across G7 capitals about the language used to describe the Israel-Hamas war, the Russo-Ukraine war, and China.
While we’d stop short of calling this G7 foreign ministers’ statement specific or precise, the language used is certainly not waffle. That tells us that a broad consensus has emerged amongst G7 countries on how to deal with the most pressing global issues.
Also worth noting:
US Secretary of State Antony
Blinken
said “
the G7 is more united than ever
”.
With that said, France was the only G7 country to support a
UN resolution
calling for an “
immediate and sustained humanitarian truce leading to a cessation of hostilities
” in Gaza.
📰
How newspapers covered…
US Secretary of State Antony Blinken’s visit to South Korea:
Washington DC, US
“Blinken Heads to Japan, South Korea, India After Middle East Visit”
Ankara, Turkey
“US officials' visit to South Korea will bring 'new war cloud': North Korean expert”
Seoul, South Korea
“Blinken's Seoul visit to focus mainly on North Korea-Russia cooperation”
Today’s newsletter is supported by: incogni
You might be wondering—where do spammers get my phone number and email address? The most likely answer is data brokers. These companies specialize in collecting personal information and selling them in bulk to marketers (and sometimes scammers).
The good news is, you can still avoid the Black Friday spam madness before it hits! Use
code INTRIGUE
today to get an exclusive 60% discount for Intrigue readers and
get your data off 180+ data brokers and people search sites automatically with Incogni.
Worried you won’t see the results? There’s no better time to test it out than during the marketing frenzy that is Black Friday. If you don’t find peace from spam within 30 days they offer a full refund.
Get started today.
🌱
Road to COP28
We’ll answer your COP questions every week!
You asked: Do big climate conferences work? And if not, what are the alternatives?
The 2015 United Nations Climate Change Conference (COP21) held in Paris was a success. The ‘Paris Agreement’ was remarkable insofar as the participating 196 countries agreed, by consensus, to reduce their carbon output "
as soon as possible
".
So, whether you think climate conferences work or not is more about the
enforceability and accountability
of any measures that are agreed.
For example, climate activist Greta Thunberg called the UN climate conferences last year as opportunities
“for leaders and people in power to get attention, using many different kinds of greenwashing”,
adding that the system
“was not really working.”
So, let’s imagine that the UN climate conferences go the way of the dodo - what other options does the world have to try and tackle a collective action problem like climate change?
🧑‍⚖️ Litigation in international (and national) courts:
In March, the
International Court of Justice
said it would consider Vanuatu’s complaint that countries weren’t acting quickly enough to respond to climate change. The ICJ will likely issue its non-binding, advisory opinion in late 2024.
📛
Other, less headline-grabbing conferences:
There are plenty of local, national, and regional climate conferences (many
organised by the UN
) that help stakeholders align their policies. Without the glaring spotlight of the world’s media, these conferences have the benefit of allowing negotiators more political wriggle room.
💪
Good ol’fashioned activism:
This includes everything from individual boycotts of products (think plastic straws),
activist investing
that seeks to increase representation on corporate boards, to lobbying domestic governments for faster action.
The jury is out
on whether any of it is effective.
Intrigue’s take:
Many people are understandably frustrated with what they perceive as a lack of climate action and the lip service world leaders seemingly pay to climate issues.
But when facing a long-term collective action problem (like climate change), countries need to create a shared
global
vision for the future. While the other methods mentioned above have their merits and are part of the solution, global conferences like COPs - replete with their grandiose speechifying - are probably still the most effective way to change the global narrative.
Also worth noting:
This year’s COP will be the first
‘Global Stocktake’
to measure progress towards the Paris Agreement’s goals.
➕
Extra Intrigue
Here’s what people were Googling yesterday:
🇦🇹
Austrians
were searching for ‘
Coca Cola Weihnachtstruck
’ (
Coca-Cola Christmas truck
) to check whether the festive road tour would come to a city near them. Who can blame them?
🇨🇱
Folks in
Chile
were looking up ‘
Nueva Ley de Tránsit
o’ (
New transit law
) to prepare as
new traffic measures
(
🇨🇱
) come into effect on Friday.
🇯🇵
Japanese
gamers were eager to learn more about ‘原神 フリーナ’ (Genshin Freena) a
new character
was introduced in a popular videogame.
🗳️ Poll time!
Which of the following is the most effective at creating progress on climate issues?
🌏 Global conferences (COP)
🗣️ Regional groupings
✊ Grassroots advocacy
🧑‍⚖️ The courts
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
📜
Today in history
East Berliners making their way into West Berlin on 10 November 1989 through an Allied checkpoint. Credits: STR New
On this day in 1989, the wall separating East and West Berlin opened up to allow the free movement of people through the two halves of the city, effectively leading to Germany’s reunification and the beginning of the end of the Cold War.
Yesterday’s poll:
Should presidents/prime ministers have a maximum term limit?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
👍 Yes, term limits enforce political turnover (89%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 👎 No, let the people choose an alternative at the polls (10%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!)  (1%)
Your two cents
:
👍
E.T:
“Yes, they should. Even the best songs have a final note, and leaders should be no exception.”
👎
O.R:
“Term limits work both ways and may entrench a power-hungry despot as much as create insecurity for newer occupants. Flexibility creates a need to work for the voters, with some minor risk of rigging or pork-barrelling. Overall, flexibility is preferable to fostering complacency.”
✍️
G.S:
“Depends on how the political (voting) system works?”