URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/gazas-alahli-arab-hospital
Title: 🌍 Gaza’s Al-Ahli Arab hospital

Presented by
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Now more than ever, we really appreciate you placing your trust in us.
Today’s briefing is a 5 min read:
🚨
Gaza’s
Al-Ahli Arab hospital
.
🇻🇪
Maduro signs a deal with
Venezuela’s
opposition.
➕
Plus:
An intriguing court case in Indonesia, how the papers are covering Putin’s latest trip abroad, and what we’re reading about additional US curbs on chip exports to China.
Israel - Gaza
Gaza’s Al-Ahli Arab hospital
There’ve been very worrying developments since we last wrote
, starting with an explosion at the Ahli Arab Hospital in Gaza City that’s left many dead.
Egypt
,
Iran
,
Jordan
,
Saudi Arabia
,
Turkey
, the
UAE
, the
Palestinian Authority
and others say the explosion was the result of an Israeli air strike.
And furious reactions have erupted across the region, including:
Mass protests in
Morocco
and
Iran
, plus fiery demonstrations and incursions at the Israeli embassy in
Amman
, the Israeli consulate in
Istanbul
,
the US Embassy
in Beirut, and elsewhere.
For its part,
Israel
says
intel
shows a failed rocket launch by
Palestinian Islamic Jihad
(PIJ) caused the blast, a claim PIJ has
denied
. The US
suspects
PIJ too.
In parallel,
Switzerland
,
the UK
, and
the US
(among others) are condemning the massive loss of life while investigations continue.
And in the meantime, this blast threatens to be the event we worried
might kick off a chain reaction of escalatory events across the region.
Biden is walking the finest of diplomatic lines
As President Biden
lands
in Israel for talks with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu today (Wednesday),
his visit is now looking extraordinary
:
Security risks
. It’s rare for a US president to pre-announce a visit to a conflict zone, let alone one that deteriorates while he’s in the air. The idea was to impose a pause: deter Iran and create space for Israel to think carefully about its next steps. But that idea is fading in real time.
Diplomatic risks
. Biden’s aim was to publicly support Israel’s “
right to defend itself
” against Hamas atrocities while not further inflaming the region. Outrage without escalation. That just got a whole lot harder.
And in private
, we expect Biden may delineate the extent of US support, push Netanyahu to allow aid into Gaza, and caution him on the real escalatory peril ahead. But because these talks will remain private,
Biden risks being seen as sanctioning whatever path Israel ends up pursuing
.
Another of Biden’s goals for this trip
was to
work with Israel’s neighbours to alleviate the humanitarian disaster in Gaza. But this now looks fraught:
Citing the hospital blast, Jordan has
cancelled a summit
between its king, Egypt’s president, the Palestinian Authority leader, and Biden.
Final thought:
We can’t remember a higher-stakes trip by a sitting US president. Biden’s public grief at the Hamas atrocities has made him a very popular figure in Israel - a fact that will no doubt enter Netanyahu’s calculations as he considers his next move.
But if the region is determined to go to war, there’s only so much even a US president can do to stop it.
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇨🇳
China
: Ottawa has accused China’s fighter jets of
conducting dangerous manoeuvres
within 5m (16ft) of a Canadian military plane. Canada says its aircraft was taking part in a UN operation over international waters to enforce sanctions on North Korea.
🇺🇦
Ukraine
: President Zelensky has reported
Ukraine’s first use of US-supplied ATACMS missiles
. The long-range guided missiles, shipped to Kyiv in secret, reportedly hit several Russian military targets in Ukraine’s east.
🇸🇬
Singapore
: The city-state’s
exports fell for the 12th straight month
in September, as a gloomy economic outlook depressed demand for its goods and services. But Singapore’s exports to China actually rose during the month, hinting at a possible recovery.
🇧🇷
Brazil
: Water levels in the rainforest port of Manaus have
dropped to their lowest in over 120 years
due to a prolonged drought. Brazil’s science ministry blames the drought on this year’s onset of the El Niño climate phenomenon.
🇳🇬
Nigeria
: Abuja is looking to
toughen up its licensing rules
for foreign mining companies. The idea is to push foreign miners to invest more in local refining and processing.
🇻🇪
Venezuela | Politics
Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro
Free and fair elections in Venezuela?
Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro
agreed
(
🇻🇪
) during a meeting with opposition leaders yesterday (Tuesday) to ensure next year’s presidential election will be competitive.
Venezuela’s last election in 2018 was anything but. Its authorities:
⛔
barred leading opposition parties
from participating, and
🗓️
brought the election forward
by seven months, leaving less time for opposition candidates to organise.
Since then, heightened international pressure has
failed to oust Maduro
. So the opposition is again focused on beating him at the ballot box instead.
And in exchange for forthcoming US sanctions relief on his oil industry, Maduro agreed yesterday to allow international electoral observers, while pledging that parties can pick their own candidates and get fair media access.
Intrigue's take:
But why now?
Laura Dib
at the DC-based
Washington Office for Latin America
told Intrigue it comes down to money:
“After 2019, Maduro relied on Russia and China for support. But Russia has a war, and when Maduro went to China recently he came back empty-handed. Maduro needs [US] sanctions relief to get money into the country.”
Still, we (like Laura) have doubts Maduro’s assurances
will result in free or fair elections
.
As Laura put it,
“Maduro has too much to lose.”
Also worth noting:
An opposition primary process on 22 October looks set to nominate protest leader
María Corina Machado
as a 2024 candidate.
Venezuelan authorities
banned her from public office
in June.
📰
How newspapers covered…
Russian President Vladimir
Putin’s visit to China this week
New York, US
“Defying U.S. Pressure, China Rolls Out Red Carpet for Putin”
Moscow, Russia
“Xi, Putin to conduct in-depth dialogue on bilateral relations”
Beijing, China
“Russia closely backs Belt and Road Forum for international cooperation”
The Next Smart Home Staple
Where were you when Amazon acquired
Ring for $1B
? Or when Google bought
Nest for a
cool $3.2B
?
Hopefully, you were invested in those promising startups. But for those that missed out, the next groundbreaking Smart Home innovation has arrived 一
RYSE
.
Their
automated window shade tech is now launching in Best Buy stores
, and is poised to dominate the fast-growing Smart Shades market. They’ve also just launched a new investment round and their share price has already grown 25% from their last round!
The Smart Shades race is on, and RYSE is in pole position due to their:
Unmatched Features
: RYSE has the only retrofit design to motorize existing window shades, and can be seamlessly controlled by voice, smartphone, or schedule.
Smart Price:
Priced at $169 vs. competitors’ pricing of up to $1,000 per window, RYSE is uniquely positioned to bring luxury window shades to every home and business.
The exclusive public offering closes this month - learn more here
.
🇮🇩
Indonesia | Politics
Is Indonesian President Joko Widodo trying to establish a political dynasty?
An intriguing court decision in Indonesia
Indonesia’s constitutional court
upheld
on Monday a rule that presidential and vice-presidential candidates must be at least 40 years old. But it then carved out an exemption for younger candidates with experience in office.
Where’s the intrigue?
President Widodo’s son (36) is rumoured to be eyeing a run for VP
A party now chaired by
his other son
co-filed the case, and
Widodo’s brother-in-law heads up the court that made the decision.
And this all fuels speculation that he’s seeking to establish a political dynasty.
Intrigue’s take:
Widodo, who remains popular but is term-limited, continues to
shrug off
the speculation while
declining
(
🇮🇩
) to discuss the court case.
And he himself
signed
(
🇮🇩
) the electoral age limit into law back in 2017.
But we won’t have to wait long to see how this all pans out: nominations for February’s general elections open tomorrow (Thursday).
Also worth noting:
In explaining its exemption, the court referred to examples of leaders in France and New Zealand being elected while in their 30s.
➕
Extra Intrigue
What we’re reading about new US limits on chip sales to China
Biden to cut China off from more Nvidia chips, expand curbs to dozens of countries
China’s chip imports decline 15% in first nine months of 2023 as the country braces for a new round of US tech export controls
Nvidia stock falls after U.S. announces new restrictions on AI chip exports
What’s behind Samsung, SK Hynix chip war waivers?
🗳️ Poll time!
Do you agree with oil sanctions relief for Venezuela in exchange for fairer elections?
🖊️ Yes, it's a win-win
⛔ No, Maduro will take the relief then renege on his pledge
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think India and China will ever be close partners?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
👎 No, they're too big and different to be anything but rivals (82%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 👍 Yes, their shared interests will eventually pull them together (17%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!)  (1%)
Your two cents
:
👎
P.T
: “While both China and India support a multipolar world, China wants a unipolar Asia. […] It believes in the old Chinese saying that there can’t be two tigers on one mountain.”
👍
M.G:
“Never say never. Unexpected political bedfellows can be found worldwide, and depend on the circumstances of the moment.”
✍️
M.C:
“Don’t know.”
[Intrigue: gotta respect that honesty]