URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/r
Title: 🌍 Gen Z did what in Nepal?

Today’s briefing:
— Gen Z did
what
in Nepal?
— A demolition art exhibit in India
— Your free ticket to the Moon
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. One of the many things I did not have on my bingo cards for 2025 is the correlation (not causation!) between the #nepobaby TikTok trend and recent
protests against Nepal’s government
. Not even Paris Hilton could have seen that one coming.
The ‘Gen Z Protests’, as they’ve been dubbed, are not the first time social media has been used to amplify political messages or mobilise groups to action. But it’s an interesting example of how seemingly innocuous social media trends can lead to unpredictable reactions.
We take you through the issue in our top story today. Let’s dive in.
Number of the day
$393B
That
was
the net worth of the world’s richest person — Oracle co-founder Larry Ellison — after rosy cloud revenue projections sent his firm’s stocks soaring 40%, briefly vaulting him over Elon Musk and into first place on Wednesday. We say ‘was’ and ‘briefly’ because Oracle has already lost some of those gains, leaving Ellison back in second again.
What just happened in Kathmandu?
Wedged between China and India high up in the Himalayas, Nepal is usually known for rich foreigners dropping a cool $50k to climb Everest, or scoffing down piles of momo dumplings warm enough to take the edge off Kathmandu’s winters.
But Nepal is now facing its most serious political crisis since 2008, when it brought Maoist insurgents back in from the cold, ditched its monarchy, and became a republic.
So… what went wrong?
You can see seeds of today’s crisis in that single sentence above, but the latest wobbles started last week when the centre-left-Communist ruling coalition banned 26 social media platforms like WhatsApp, Instagram, and Facebook for failing to register locally.
Officials said it was to ensure these foreign platforms complied with local laws, but the ban didn’t go down well given millions of Nepalis abroad rely on those apps to call home.
The timing was suspicious, too.
For weeks, young Nepalis had been venting online about corruption and inequality under the hashtag
#nepokids
,
mocking
the Kardashian-esque lifestyles of political kids in one of Asia’s poorest countries. So last week’s ban felt not only like proof corrupt elites were out of touch, but also that they were now actively trying to silence the people.
Those escalating protests then bubbled over on Monday when…
Security forces
opened fire
, leaving at least 30 demonstrators dead
Protestors
torched
the Hilton, parliament, supreme court, and the PM’s house
The finance minister himself got
chased
(then fly-kicked) by an angry mob
The government then
reversed
its social media ban, and
The prime minister and four ministers then
resigned
.
And that was Monday!
Then, with the military clearing the streets of Kathmandu, youth-led protestors went full
Alanis Morissette
, using one of Nepal’s very same banned apps (Discord) to actually vote for a new interim leader to fill the power vacuum! The winner…?
🥁
🥁
🥁
Nepal’s highly-regarded former chief justice (
Sushila Karki
), who had herself joined the demonstrations and issued fiery denunciations against the protestor deaths.
So she’s now nominally in charge (subject to the military’s whims), and just gave her
first international interview
, pledging to lead just for “
a short time
” towards a new start.
But for us, the most striking aspect was
who
got this exclusive:
a network in India!
Why?
Amid all the
China-India rivalry
, Beijing will see this week’s upheaval as a threat to its foothold in strategically located Nepal, whether the string of recent trade and military deals, or even getting the (ex)PM to buck tradition by visiting China (instead of India) first!
But now, Nepal’s new leader has used
a TV appearance in India
to highlight her Hindi, her education in India, her home near India’s border, plus even greet India’s leader. And implicit in her remark that international relations are about the people (not just governments), is a sense she wants to
rebalance
Nepal back towards where its cultural and economic ties have always been strongest: with India.
So as the military curfew lifts today (Thursday) and Kathmandu international airport finally reopens, it’s not just Gen-Z counting its blessings. It’s probably neighbouring India, too.
Intrigue’s Take
We were tempted to write this one using Gen-Z slang like ‘slay’ and ‘sus’, but after getting hospitalised with acute-cringe by watching others try that, we just kept it
💯
(sorry).
There’s now a rhetorical struggle around how to frame these events: some in the foreign media like to pitch it as
hip youths
using their shiny apps to march for a brighter future.
Others frame it as an
old story
re-emerging via new tech, as Nepali students join those in Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Turkey, Indonesia, and beyond to hold the powerful to account.
But the sheer level of violence, destruction, and looting that unfolded this week should be enough to nudge us towards an acknowledgement that it’s just
too early to say
: students themselves are
deploring
the chaos, and suggesting extremist elements are to blame.
And that right there hints at the
tensions still lurking within
: there are groups with wildly different views on how today’s Nepal should look, ranging from Maoists who terrorised the countryside for decades trying to establish their classless utopia, through to monarchists who’ve still been protesting
this year
to bring back the king (exiled in India).
But even any
nostalgia for those royal days
is clouded by the fact the last king only rose to power after his brother (the crown prince) went on a 2001 shooting rampage at the palace, wiping out most of Nepal’s line of succession!
So let’s just say the Nepali people could've done far worse than end up with someone of Judge Karki’s calibre. Let’s see what she does next.
Sound smarter
:
Japan’s Viber and China’s TikTok were the only two platforms that complied with Nepal’s brief new rules, so were the only two excluded from the brief ban.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
Manhunt
.
Elected representatives from both sides of the aisle have denounced acts of political violence after an unknown assailant fatally shot conservative activist Charlie Kirk from afar during a college event in Utah. A major manhunt is still underway. (
CBS
)
🇬🇧
UNITED KINGDOM
-
More to come
.
The British ambassador to the US, Peter Mandelson, is fighting to retain his post after a Congressional committee published his effusive 2003 birthday note to “
my best pal
”, Jeffrey Epstein. British tabloids have also revealed a 2008 email emphasising his support, even on the eve of Epstein’s sentencing. (
Politico
)
Comment
: You’ll recall we covered Mandelson as part of our look into the
geopolitics of Epstein
. It’s hard to think of something that’s aged worse than his February dismissal of any Epstein ties as nothing but a media “obsession”, or his exhortation for Financial Times reporters to “f**k off* when they asked about it.
🇰🇷
SOUTH KOREA
-
Deadlock.
US-South Korea trade talks have reportedly reached a deadlock over DC’s push for a $350B investment fund, with Seoul warning that its smaller economy and currency implications prevent it from replicating Trump’s Japan’s deal. (
Japan Times
)
🇧🇷
BRAZIL
-
Three votes down.
Three out of Brazil’s five supreme court justices have now cast their votes in the Jair Bolsonaro trial, with two finding the former president guilty of a 2022 coup plot, while a third has moved to annul the case. The final two are set to cast their votes in the coming days. (
Mercopress
)
Comment
: A conviction seems likely at this point, setting Brazil up for even more tension with the Trump Administration, which already cited this case when slapping 50% tariffs on Brazil.
🇳🇴
NORWAY
-
Ruling party holds on.
Norway’s ruling Labour Party has emerged the winner of Monday’s elections, leaving the centre-left coalition at the helm for another four years. The right-populist Progress Party ended up recording its best-ever result, more than doubling its parliamentary footprint. (
Guardian
)
🇪🇹
ETHIOPIA
-
Dam it.
Addis Ababa has inaugurated Africa’s biggest hydroelectric dam along the Nile, shrugging off Egyptian and Sudanese complaints that the project is an unlawful threat to their water supply. As much as 90% of Egypt’s fresh water supply comes from the Nile. (
AA
)
🇰🇭
CAMBODIA
-
So fly.
Cambodia has inaugurated its newest $2B airport outside the capital Phnom Penh, in hopes it’ll boost tourism (though it just fought a war with its top source of tourists, Thailand). (
Independent
)
Extra Intrigue
In other worlds
…
Space
: NASA researchers are saying their rover has found unusual compounds that could be the
best-ever evidence of ancient life
on Mars.
Art
: There’s an art exhibition in New Delhi using objects from demolitions to explore what gets left behind during
slum redevelopment
.
Sports
: British swimming is in uproar after a former Olympic medallist moved to
join the ‘Enhanced Games
’, where athletes take performance-enhancing drugs.
Ticket of the day
Credits: NASA.
Have a spare weekend sometime in 2026? NASA is
inviting
everyone to join its Artemis II Moon mission for free with a simple online signup.
There’s a catch, of course, and it’s that (ahem) it’ll just be your name stored on an SD card orbiting the Moon. Still, you can download a pretty snazzy boarding pass to show your more gullible friends.
And maybe that’ll be enough to distract them from pondering why practically every component of the Artemis Moon mission is breaking records for spending and delays.
Today’s poll
Do you think the recent protests across Asia are connected?
👍 Yes, the main link is social media
🤥 Yes, the main link is corruption
🤔 No (tell us why!)
✍️ Other (write us!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think the US knew of Israel's Doha strike in advance?
🚀
Yes, Israel wouldn't dare otherwise (72%)
❌
No, approving a strike on an ally is madness (24%)
✍️ Other (write in!)  (3%)
Your two cents:
🚀
T.H:
“It could have got a bit awkward if the US had intercepted the strike!”
❌
J.M.D:
“I don't believe Trump would have given it the green light and for that reason I don't believe Bibi would have asked permission. It isn't the first time Israel has blindsided us”
✍️
J.S:
“Of course they knew. But did they help coordinate the attack is the real question.”
✍️
Clarification corner
A
friend
of Intrigue (not Intrigue) took yesterday’s street art picture!
🤦