URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/germany-finally-unveils-china-strategy
Title: 🌍 Germany finally unveils its China strategy

Today’s newsletter supported by:
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
The Czech Republic’s Markéta Vondroušová just became the first unseeded woman to win Wimbledon, while Spain’s Carlos Alcaraz took home the men’s trophy. The last time someone other than Federer, Nadal, Murray or Djokovic won the men’s tournament, Alcaraz wasn’t even born. Feeling old?
Today’s briefing is a 4 min read:
🇩🇪
Germany
finally unveils its China strategy.
🇦🇪
The
UAE
shares its plans for hosting COP28.
➕
Plus:
The trauma of diplomatic typos, how the papers are covering Modi’s visit to France, and what a cheeseburger looks like in Thailand.
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇰🇵
North Korea:
Pyongyang’s ambassador to the UN made a rare appearance at the UN Security Council last week (13 July). He defended North Korea’s ICBM launch the day prior and
blamed the US
for raising tensions on the Peninsula.
🇮🇹
Italy
: Prime Minister Giorgia Meloni joined Dutch PM Mark Rutte and EU President Ursula von der Leyen on another trip to Tunisia yesterday (Sunday). The trio finalised
a long-awaited agreement
aimed at addressing irregular migration.
🇵🇰
Pakistan
: Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif broke ground on a $3.5B
China-designed nuclear power plant
on Friday (14 July). Pakistan currently generates 8% of its electricity from nuclear power, and hopes to lift that to 20% by 2030.
🇳🇮
Nicaragua
: The International Court of Justice rejected on Thursday (13 July) a case that sought to extend Nicaragua’s
maritime border
into territory claimed by Colombia. Nicaragua’s government promised to respect the court’s decision.
🇨🇩
Democratic Republic of the Congo:
A leading opposition figure and former government minister, Chérubin Okende, was
killed last week
by unknown assailants. Moise Katumbi, who leads Okende’s political party and plans to run for president in December, called it a
“political assassination.”
🇩🇪
Germany | Geopolitics
Germany's first China strategy just dropped
Germany released its long-awaited
China strategy
on Thursday, as the EU's biggest economy re-thinks how it approaches its top trade partner.
The strategy
describes China as a “
partner, competitor and systemic rival
” that’s “
changed
" as it seeks more assertively to re-shape the world in its own image. So… Germany says:
🚧
It doesn't intend to impede China’s development, but
⏳ De-risking is now "
urgently needed
", particularly in “
critical sectors
” like medicine, lithium batteries and chip-making, and
💰 It calls on German businesses to plan accordingly, as they’ll have to “
carry the financial risk more heavily themselves
” in the future.
German businesses have been pretty positive
in
response
, saying the strategy:
👍 Validates (and incentivises) what they were already doing, but
🤷
Some say it’s light on detail and could curb entrepreneurialism.
And for its part, an irritated Beijing said
:
🔥
It’s a “
fatal miscalculation
" to see China as the source of risk, and
🤝
The two countries are actually “
partners, not rivals
”.
Intrigue's take:
The West has dusted off
various d-words
to re-calibrate ties with China: de-couple, de-risk, diversify. So here’s another: disentangle.
Germany is entangled in a web of competing interests and concerns: human rights, Beijing-Moscow ties, EU unity, Beijing’s efforts to re-shape global norms, and China’s key role in Germany's own export-led growth.
The sheer complexity of disentangling all this, while managing internal divisions (meticulously
documented
by China’s state media), might explain why Berlin was still
tweaking the strategy
hours before it was released.
But initial reactions suggest it’s done a fairly solid job of disentangling in a way that’s coherent, if not always concrete.
Also worth noting:
Germany’s strategy says it won’t be possible “
to overcome the climate crisis without China.
”
Germany’s spy chief
warned
a parliamentary inquiry last year that “
Russia is the storm, China is climate change.
”
Major German companies like
Siemens
,
BASF
and
Volkswagen
have recently released strategies that retain a heavy China focus.
📰
How newspapers covered…
Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi attending France’s Bastille Day celebrations
Doha, Qatar
“India’s Modi guest of honour at France’s Bastille Day parade”
Bonn, Germany
“Modi's Bastille Day visit stirs controversy in France”
Noida, India
“PM Modi conferred with France’s highest award, Grand Cross of the Legion of Honour”
Today’s newsletter is supported by: Digital Asset Investor
Subscribe to Digital Asset Investor
Richard Patey breaks down the top news & opportunities in online business, domains & NFTs to help you become a better digital asset investor.
Check it out!
🇦🇪
U
nited Arab Emirates
| Climate
COP28’s leader lays out his vision
Sultan Ahmed Al Jaber, the oil executive and cabinet minister presiding over the UAE’s upcoming COP28 climate summit,
shared his plans
for the conference last week. Here are some of the key details:
🌡️
1.5C:
Al Jaber
says
the goal of limiting global warming to 1.5C will be the conference’s
“single north star”
⚡
Energy:
He wants concrete plans to double energy efficiency and hydrogen production, and triple renewable energy capacity, and
🏦
Climate finance:
Al Jaber wants rich countries to deliver on their long-standing climate funding pledges to poorer nations.
Intrigue’s take:
The UAE’s decision to name an oil executive like Al Jaber as its COP28 president attracted criticism at the time. But in words at least, it seems he’s leaning into the role. And we’ll find out in November/December how much of the world is willing to follow his lead.
Also worth noting:
Al Jaber also called for the
“inevitable and essential [...] phase down of fossil fuels.”
Some climate groups
described
Al Jaber’s vision as “incoherent” and “confusing”.
The UAE set
stricter emissions reduction targets
earlier this year, aiming for a 40% cut by 2030 (up from 31%).
➕
Extra Intrigue
Your weekly roundup of the world’s quirkier headlines.
Burger King in Thailand has announced a ‘real cheeseburger’ consisting of
20 slices of cheese
between two bread buns.
Birds in Europe are
making their nests with anti-bird spikes
.
A Californian otter has had enough of surfers and has
started snatching their boards
.
Former Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro has
opened an online merch store
complete with Bolsonaro party hats and cake decorations.
A French firefighter has broken the world record for the
fastest 100m sprint (while on fire)
.
Helsinki’s deputy mayor has been
caught defacing public property
.
🗳️ Poll time!
If you were the leader of your own imaginary country, which world power would you want on your side, and why?
🇺🇸 US
🇨🇳 China
🇬🇧 UK
🇮🇳 India
🇫🇷 France
🇹🇷 Turkey
🇧🇷 Brazil
🇩🇪 Germany
🇯🇵 Japan
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
😂
Meme of the day
We were really feeling this energy
after hitting send on Friday’s
Intrigue
then spotting typos: the Cuba and Thailand map pins were switched; the NATO summit was in Lithuania (not Latvia), and the correct quiz answer was 1 ‘d’ (Jupiter has 80-95 moons). Thanks to the many Intriguers who wrote in!
Thursday’s poll:
This year's Emmy nominees were just announced. Who are you hoping will bring home the 'Best Drama' award?
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🌌
Andor (10%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ☎️ Better Call Saul (9%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
👑
The Crown (3%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🐉
House of the Dragon (4%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🧟
The Last of Us (10%)
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
💼
Succession (16%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 🍸 The White Lotus (6%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ⚽ Yellowjackets (2%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🤷
Who cares? (40%)
Your two cents
:
🤷
K.S:
“I usually lag behind on TV shows and wait till about a year after the hype dies down to binge & everything on my own time”
🌌
C:
“Andor is the best Star Wars we've had since 'The Empire Strikes Back', and you can't Jedi mind trick me into thinking otherwise.”