URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/global-oil-markets-in-four-numbers
Title: 🌍 Global oil markets in four numbers

Today’s briefing:
— Global oil markets in four numbers
— Go work for the Danes in Nairobi
— Embassy for sale!
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Any
Yellowstone
(and Kevin Costner) fans out there amongst our Intrigue community? If you like that series by Taylor Sheridan, you might have also seen its prequels (
1883
and
1923
) and Sheridan’s films like
Wind River
and
Sicario
(his debut as a screenwriter).
Why am I mentioning all this, you ask? Well, his latest series,
Landman
, is also a rollicking ride. It stars Billy Bob Thornton and is set in the heart of West Texas, featuring all sorts of unsavoury characters and folks trying to strike it rich in the oil business. A tale as old as time.
Anyway, we take you through a roundup of
the world’s top oil stories
in today’s briefing. HMU if you ever want to chat
Yellowstone
…
Number of the day
26
That’s the reported number of world leaders who attended China’s WWII parade today (Wednesday), including Russia’s Vladimir Putin, North Korea’s Kim Jong Un, Iran’s Masoud Pezeshkian, and a surprise appearance from Indonesia’s Prabowo (after initially cancelling due to unrest back home). Slovakia’s Robert Fico was the only NATO / EU member there.
Barrel of news
Here at Intrigue, we pride ourselves on having a refined sense of humour and the ability to extract the last drop of value from news reserves around the world.
So here are the four oil numbers you need to know:
600,000
That’s how many barrels of oil just left
Syria's ports
via its first
official
sale in 14 years. You’ll recall former dictator Al-Assad’s brutal crackdown triggered crippling sanctions that blocked exports until President Trump eased things this June.
Now of course, 600k barrels won’t make a massive difference to international markets: the Saudis, for example, ship more than 10x that every day. But it’s
a massive deal for Free Syria
as it attempts to rebuild from the rubble, just as 850,000+ refugees return home.
And Damascus hopes to ramp up further, with talks underway to get oil majors invested — it hopes sharing the spoils might also keep friendly capitals engaged. As opposed to…
68%
That’s how much Russian energy giant Rosneft saw its profits
decline
in the first half of 2025 (yoy), dropping to a paltry $3B. CEO Igor Sechin isn’t afraid to lay blame, including:
“
oversupply
”: he’s always been an OPEC sceptic, and blames the cartel’s earlier production cuts (to lift prices) for instead ceding market share to the US. Now he’s unhappy as OPEC rapidly reverses course.
“
significant ruble strengthening
”: that’s a dig at Putin’s central bank chief (Nabiullina) who’s hiked rates to 18% to avert a ruble collapse and hose-down 9% inflation — but of course, a stronger ruble is mayhem for exporters like Sechin.
“
tighter EU and US sanction restrictions
":
actual
production
has remained steady, but sanction-imposed discounts are eating Russia’s profits (as intended)
.
The result is
a cash squeeze
, exacerbated by Ukraine’s continued hits on refineries, all just as Putin spends
more
cash to finance his war and energy infrastructure investments.
Sechin’s blame game also hints at the pressures on both Russia’s elites back home and its partnerships abroad (like losing OPEC influence), and he conspicuously avoids mentioning the root cause: Putin’s invasion of Ukraine.
700
That’s how many observers witnessed Guyana’s elections on Monday, and oil executives are tuning in for Thursday’s results for three reasons:
first
, the tiny rainforested nation has been morphing into a
petrostate
since ExxonMobil’s historic discovery back in 2015.
Second
, presidential hopeful Aubrey Norton (President Ali’s main challenger) is now pledging to
re-negotiate
Guyana’s agreements with ExxonMobil.
And
third
, execs are also watching for any reaction from neighbouring
Venezuela
, which sits on the world’s largest oil reserves but still claims two-thirds of Guyana too (including most of the oil). And that’s all while eight US warships float off Venezuela’s coast, prompting more fiery rhetoric from volatile local dictator, Nicolás Maduro.
Zero
That’s how much analysts expect OPEC to increase output at this Sunday’s meeting. Ie, they’re banking on a pause after OPEC’s recent aggressive ramp-up (per Sechin’s gripes above), allowing markets to absorb added supply before deciding any next steps.
But interestingly, an oil oversupply isn’t yet showing up in the data, as prices still hover around the healthy $70 mark. And there are
a couple of interesting geopolitical drivers
why:
first
, markets are still jittery around supply (Russia, Houthis, Iran, etc).
But
second
(and relatedly), a lot of the increased supply seems to be getting snorted up by the world’s top oil buyer (
China
), now filling its strategic reserve at double the usual rate. The details are classified, but you can infer what’s going on via other data points.
Inferring
motives
,
however,
is trickier — China started this ramp-up back in March when prices dropped, then continued through the Israel-Iran war. But even factoring in the order-delivery lag (plus today’s higher prices), China still seems to be stockpiling oil.
And with each passing week, it raises the likelihood China is not just carpé-ing the diem of low prices, or playing it safe amid Middle East wars — rather, it suggests Beijing also has an eye on emerging risks ahead, including the possibility of wider US sanctions.
Intrigue’s Take
We talk often about our world going multipolar, but today’s briefing is an example of how it’s playing out in energy politics, too.
No single player
— whether OPEC, Russia, the Saudis, the Russians or the US — can meaningfully dictate the terms anymore. Rather, it’s a constant tug-of-war between producers and consumers over pricing and market share.
We also sense
a tug-of-war
between market resilience and vulnerability: markets seem surprisingly resilient given everything going on. But the stockpiling and risk-pricing is a reminder how much markets also seem permanently on edge for the next disruption.
But zooming out, all this tug-of-war is also playing out on
rapidly
shifting sands
: China is now installing a hundred solar panels
per second
. Even as its coal use grows, the sheer pace and scale of its energy transition hints at the emergence of a new kind of player ahead, less dependent on neighbours, markets, sanctions, or chokepoints: the electrostate.
Sound even smarter:
Ukraine knocked out ~17% of Russia’s active refining capacity last month.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
Military action
.
President Trump has announced a US strike on a small boat carrying narcotics in the southern Caribbean, killing 11. The vessel reportedly belonged to the Venezuela-based
Tren de Aragua
group the US just designated as terrorists. (
CBS
)
Comment
: Aside from any counter-narcotics aims, it looks like classic gunboat diplomacy aimed at pressuring Venezuela’s Maduro regime.
🇯🇵
JAPAN
-
Pulling the ripcord
.
The leader and other top reps from Prime Minister Ishiba’s ruling party have signalled an intention to resign after July’s historic Upper House defeat. It all leaves the PM himself in a precarious position, but he’s still digging in. (
Japan Times
)
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
Gone drilling.
Research out of a US thinktank suggests China has been drilling for oil and gas well within Taiwan’s exclusive economic zone, with one of its state-run majors (CNOOC) even using two of the largest wellhead platforms in Asia. (
The Guardian
)
Comment:
We
wrote
last week about Beijing’s history of using commercial infrastructure like ✌️fishermen huts✌️ to advance its
unlawful
claims over most of the South China Sea. This drilling fits the same greyzone playbook, and doesn’t leave Taiwan many options. Interestingly, Japan also just accused China of positioning 21 drilling rigs within Japan’s own exclusive zone.
🇮🇹
ITALY
-
Accounting questions.
Rome is considering writing off its proposed $13.5B mega-bridge to Sicily as a military expenditure, in an attempt to reach NATO's new 5% spending target. But the US seems to be calling BS, with a US envoy warning that NATO’s “
straight face
” pledge doesn’t cover “
bridges that have no military strategic value
”. (
Bloomberg
$)
🇲🇾
MALAYSIA
-
In my office now, please.
TikTok executives are due for a formal meeting with Malaysia’s police chief and attorney-general tomorrow (Thursday), amid local frustration over the platform’s delays in pulling fake news. (
Straits Times
)
🇵🇪
PERU
-
Danger abroad.
Lima authorities say they’re investigating the possibility that Monday’s shooting death of an Indonesian diplomat was a contract killing — footage shows the assassins were waiting outside his apartment, and fled without taking anything. (
AP
)
Comment:
We can only imagine how a junior Indonesian diplomat could’ve become the target of a contract killing within months of landing, but Peru’s foreign minister is describing it more as a “wake-up call” for the country’s broader insecurity
.
🇨🇩
DR
CONGO
-
Caught red-handed.
A court has sentenced Congo’s former justice minister to three years of forced labour on charges of embezzling millions intended for a prison. (
SABC
)
Extra Intrigue
The Intrigue jobs board
💼
Head of Global Communications @
Duolingo
in NYC
Global Policy Intern @
FiscalNote
in Brussels
Senior Advisor, Business Development @
Danish Refugee Council
in Nairobi
Consultant
@
BCG
in Buenos Aires
Embassy of the day
Credits: Dexters.
Forget trying to snag an invite to the embassy’s latest evening of sniffing piscos or knobbing hobs. Every now and then, an embassy just gets listed for sale!
For example, right now the Dominican Republic’s former mission in London is
on the market
for a cool $13M. Why?
The Dominicans moved out of the 1840s-era townhouse back in 2021, after wealthy neighbours won a bid to block them from using the property as an embassy (something the diplomats were already doing for years before lodging their formal request — oops).
Extra fun fact
: the property comes with access to one of Hyde Park’s largest private garden squares (1.6 acres).
Today’s poll
Do you think we're near peak oil?
(The International Energy Agency still projects oil demand will stop growing by 2030)
🛢️ No way - the IEA is often wrong
☀️ Yep - solar growth is historic
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Which forum do you think will lose the most influence in the next decade?
🪖
North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) (11%)
🇨🇳
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) (5%)
🇺🇳
United Nations (UN) (35%)
🌐
G20 (13%)
🌍 BRICS  (12%)
™️ World Trade Organization (WTO) (23%)
✍️ Other (write us!) (1%)
Your two cents:
🇺🇳
R.L:
“The UN has the most influence to lose, and doesn't seem to be trying too hard to retain it.”
🪖
B.K:
“As Russia offers itself as an alternative to the United States alongside China, NATO's purpose and base will splinter.”
™️ C.D:
“Multipolar economic fragmentation undermines the WTO's influence.”
🌐
A.P:
“Countries in the G20 are looking to expand in other directions and the weight of the current structure will hold them back.”