URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/greetings-intrigues-team-retreat
Title: 🌍 Greetings from Intrigue's team retreat

Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
A smug thing to do at parties is to talk about malapropisms. That's where you use a word that
sounds
right but is definitely wrong, often to humorous effect.
I learned about malapropisms the very hard way, when I very publicly exhorted a downcast colleague not to "
self-defecate
" (the much more helpful and sanitary term I wanted was "
self-deprecate
").
I guess my point is that sometimes it's really worth taking a moment to think and plan, and that's exactly what we've been doing on our Intrigue team retreat in Maryland the past few days.
Our team of former diplomats will be back in your inbox each weekday from Wednesday, getting you what you need to know. And in the meantime? Here are three quick things we thought you might enjoy.
See you soon!
1. “How Internet Culture Shapes Our World: Memes, Deepfakes, and Virality.”
We were delighted to partner with the Australian Embassy in Washington D.C.
last week to host a wonderful conversation about AI and how it is shaping our political environment.
Australia’s former prime minister and now ambassador to the US, Kevin Rudd AC
, gave remarks that led one attendee to ask us, “
How the hell does he know so much about AI? Very impressive!
”
The event was a huge success (that’s direct feedback, not just us tooting our own horn!), so make sure you keep an eye out in the newsletter
for our next event in September.
In the meantime, you can
read our full event recap here
.
2. Calling all election junkies: Election Intrigue is for you!
If you haven’t signed up for our very own
Election Intrigue
newsletter and podcast, you’re missing the best deep dive on the US election around!
Every Thursday
, we bring you the most important developments in the race for the White House, with a special focus on what the election means for the rest of the world.
Was Israel’s assassination
of a senior Hamas leader done to influence the US election? How might potential vice-presidential nominee Josh Shapiro’s positions on Israel and Gaza affect Kamala Harris’s bid for the White House?
We answered those questions and more in the most recent edition, so make sure you sign up!
Sign up for free
3. Check out the John&Jacob Show on YouTube
Each week, our
Co-Founder John Fowler
and the
Director of Geopolitical Analysis at Cognitive Investments, Jacob Shapiro
, get together for a fast-paced, insightful, and entertaining review of the week’s geopolitical news.
Jacob brings his cutting-edge analysis and trademark wit
to the table while John cooks up spicy hot takes based on the most recent thing he’s read.
You might laugh, but
John correctly predicted Joe Biden’s withdrawal
from the presidential race almost to the hour. Can you even afford to miss that kind of market-moving insider information? No, you cannot, so check it out!
PHOTO OF THE DAY
Our small but mighty team speaks seven languages, so we send you a warm hello, hola, hallo, ciao, 你好, merhaba, and a rusty bonjour from an AirBnB in Maryland. See you soon!
DAILY POLL
Would you join a virtual Intrigue event?
(in addition to our in-person events in DC)
🌏 Yes, because I live outside DC
👨‍💻 Yes, because virtual events are easy
🤷 No, because I don't like virtual events
📰 No, I'm just here for the daily briefing
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Was this forwarded to you? We're a team of ex-diplomats producing a concise and engaging geopolitical briefing for 100k+ leaders each day.
It’s free to subscribe
.