URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/guinea-s-world-changing-mine
Title: 🌍 Guinea’s world-changing mine

Today’s briefing:
— Guinea’s world-changing mine
— World’s trendiest embassy
— And the 2027 COP host is…
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Before we get you up to speed on
Guinea’s world-shaking iron ore mine
, I thought I’d share something that just made me laugh.
An ol’ friend back from my early diplomacy days shared a list we wrote together while bored during training. We called it “
Stuff Trainee Diplomats Like
”, and its 29 entries include:
Acronyms
Volunteering for crisis work on a Saturday, and
Sighing about “
having to work
” on a Saturday.
Ahh the memories. Let’s dive in?
Number of the day
2050
That’s the International Energy Agency’s new
Current Policies Scenario
timeline
for the world to reach ‘peak oil’ if we stick with the current approach, loosening (though not abandoning) earlier forecasts of a pre-2030 peak. It’s sparking debate at the COP climate talks now underway in Brazil.
Mine or yours?
Some things aren’t worth the wait. Think
The Phantom Menace
, Segway, or Windows Vista.
Others
are
worth the wait. Think
The White Lotus
, a bottle of Grange, or the Panama Canal.
As for the ~biggest mining project in history, Guinea’s new Simandou complex? Let’s see.
The
$23B project
actually opened yesterday (Tuesday), featuring a 600km (370mi) rail line, a deep-water port, and VIP ribbon-cutting guests like China’s Vice Premier Liu Guozhong, and Rwanda’s long-time leader Paul Kagame.
And it’s been a long time coming. British-Australian mining giant Rio Tinto started exploring Guinea’s Simandou range
way back in 1997
, and pretty soon realised its luck — this was an untapped, ~3 billion tonne deposit of high-grade iron ore.
But champagne pops were soon drowned out by
30 years of legal wrangling
, coups, and corruption, gradually whittling Rio’s stake down to 25%.
As for the other 75%?
Enter China.
Around the early 2010s, China got rattled by high iron ore prices, while Rio and others got rattled by Simandou’s massive infrastructure bill, particularly after the 2008 financial crisis.
So various state-backed firms out of China stepped in with the cash and pledged to build the mine’s epic rail and port infrastructure under China’s flagship
Belt & Road Initiative
.
As a result, China now has effective control of two of Simandou’s four blocks, and enjoys a kind of joint control with Rio over the remaining two.
And here’s why that matters to the world, starting locally in…
🇬🇳
Guinea
One of Guinea’s officials just put it like this: “
Simandou must be for us what oil was for the Gulf countries
”. Production will ramp up over the next few years, but locals hope to eventually provide ~5% of the world’s iron ore,
quadrupling
their economy by 2040.
Of course, that’ll depend on variables like political stability, stewardship, and corruption, not to mention the ore price paid by the buyer for nearly 100% of Guinea’s output…
🇨🇳
China
China already buys 75% of the world’s seaborne iron ore, hoovering it all up to fuel the nation’s historic infrastructure and manufacturing machine.
In practice that’s really meant relying on Australia, a deal that’s mostly worked well despite the occasional hard-ball tactics, like jailing Rio executives or halting BHP shipments.
And yet smooth or not, China’s strategists have become increasingly wary of ceding so much leverage to a US ally. So China’s Simandou play is really all about diversifying in both the commercial and strategic sense. And that means less leverage for…
🇦🇺
Australia
They’re single-handedly pumping out 40% of the world’s iron ore supply Down Under, with the reddish dust long the country’s single-largest export (excluding the Hemsworths).
But Simandou now coming online will reshape iron ore’s cost curve, putting downward pressure on prices and potentially shuttering lower-quality / higher-cost producers. And that’s all against the backdrop of China’s cooling economy curbing its ore thirst, while slowly shifting towards lower-emission green steel (which prefers Guinea’s higher grades).
In concrete terms? Every US$10p/tonne drop in ore prices shaves up to 0.5% off Australia’s GDP growth, and another half a billion off tax receipts. So with markets bracing for a $10-$20 price drop over the coming years, Canberra’s job might get a little tougher.
Intrigue’s Take
Some lessons from this Simandou saga?
First
,
diversification
is key, not just for China as the price-sensitive buyer or Australia as the revenue-dependent seller, but also Guinea as the ultimate decision-maker: mindful of China’s dominance, the local junta has actively courted the US for locomotives, France for railway signalling, and Germany for crushers in hopes they’ll all have a stake in making Simandou succeed. But whether a few trains or crushers will suffice is another question.
Second
, we’ve long charted how China’s willingness to deploy rivers of
cash on non-commercial terms
comes with all kinds of risks, from creeping debt to an epic property bubble. But Simandou is shaping up as an example of how that approach can also pay off, now delivering a controlling stake in an ore deposit that’s set to reshape our world.
So… worth the wait? For China, quite possibly.
Sound even smarter:
Guinea aims to supply 120 million tonnes of ore per year once fully operational. By way of comparison, Australia now supplies roughly eight times that volume.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES — Not sharing is caring.
The UK has reportedly stopped passing intelligence on Caribbean drug traffickers to its US allies, amid concerns the intel could facilitate US strikes London sees as unlawful. (
CNN
)
Comment
: While it makes for explosive headlines when leaked, this kind of intelligence throttling for legal reasons is actually pretty common among allies. The more common driver is America’s use of the death penalty, which can sometimes shape the kinds of intel its allies share if there’s a risk of capital punishment. In this instance, the US is effectively meting out the death penalty, but skipping the trial.
🇯🇵
JAPAN  — Sell, sell, sell.
Nvidia shares have dropped 3% after it emerged influential Japanese tech investor SoftBank sold its $5.8B stake in America’s AI chipmaker last month. (
Fortune
)
Comment
: Nvidia’s Jensen Huang periodically jokes about Softbank’s Masayoshi Son selling his $4B Nvidia holding back in 2019 (it’d be worth ~$150B today). Masayoshi denies losing faith in Nvidia this time around, and is framing the sale as necessary to finance his pledged $30B investment in OpenAI.
🇬🇪
GEORGIA — Turkish crash.
A Turkish military cargo plane has crashed in Georgia minutes after taking off from Azerbaijan, killing all 20 onboard. An investigation is underway. (
Euronews
)
Comment:
There’s no immediate talk of foul play, but C-130 crashes are relatively rare, and the region has been more of a hotspot since Putin invaded Ukraine.
🇫🇷
FRANCE  — We’ll be your editor.
President Macron has revealed France will help the Palestinian Authority draft a new constitution, announcing a joint legal committee and $116M in aid after meeting Mahmoud Abbas in Paris. (
Al-Monitor
)
Comment:
A smart-ass might point out that maybe France is really good at drafting constitutions because it’s had ~15 constitutions since the 1789 revolution. But we’re not smart-asses so we will not point that out.
🇮🇩
INDONESIA
— Cute and cuddly finances.
Indonesia is mulling its first “
panda bonds
” (overseas borrowing in China’s renminbi via mainland markets), after issuing its first “
kangaroo bonds
” earlier this year. (
FT
$)
Comment
: This is partly just about Indonesia diversifying its currency exposure, but it’s also about China pushing to both internationalise its RMB and curb its USD exposure. Stretched borrowers seem to like China’s lower rates, but the fact its currency is still not fully convertible (you need Beijing’s approval for certain cross-border moves) will put a ceiling on how popular these bonds get for now.
🇩🇴
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC — Darkness at last.
A possible grid transmission failure has plunged the Dominican Republic into a nationwide blackout, with power still only gradually returning. (
AP
)
🇪🇹
ETHIOPIA — Your turn.
While Turkey continues to duke it out with Australia (and its Pacific neighbours) for the rights to host next year’s COP climate talks, delegates gathering in Brazil have now named Ethiopia as the summit host for 2027, beating a rival bid from Nigeria. (
Africanews
)
Comment
: This Australia v Turkey race has dragged on longer than normal, with neither side seemingly backing down: for Australia, co-hosting with the Pacific would help blunt criticism of its climate policies, and solidify its ties with islands getting courted by China. For Ankara, it’s more about Erdogan’s vision for Turkey as a global powerbroker. But if the two competitors can’t come to some sort of deal this month, hosting duties revert to the UNFCCC secretariat in Bonn, Germany.
Extra Intrigue
A bit of diplomacy news
💼
🇯🇵
There’s been outrage after
China’s consul-general in Osaka
tweeted (then deleted) that
“China has no choice but to cut off that dirty intruding neck”,
when Prime Minister Takaichi warned that war over Taiwan would be a threat to Japan.
🇦🇺
Australia’s top court has backed the government’s 2023 move to seize a plot of
land earmarked for Russia’s new embassy
, though the court says Australia now has to pay Moscow compensation.
🇮🇹
And it turns out the wife of Chinese tech titan Jack Ma has
bought Italy’s former embassy
in London for a cool $26M. Speaking of Italian embassies…
Embassy of the day
Photos courtesy of Wallpaper
While most embassies are just drab government offices that happen to be located in exotic cities, you occasionally get the kind of renovation that’d make even the
Selling Sunset
team quiver with botoxed delight.
Italy’s mission in London is a prime example, getting a zhush that’s so hip it’s now earned a
full spread
in design outlet
Wallpaper
.
With armchairs by Gio Ponti, chandeliers by Murano, and tables by Giovanni Offredi, plus we could probably just throw random Italian names at the doors and you’d believe it (doors by Sergio Georgini), you could
almost
feel cool while getting yelled at by the ambassador for not using the minister’s preferred font when reformatting that important briefing on pistachio tariffs.
Today’s poll
Which would you rather for your own natural resource project?
⛏️ Faster builds, higher risks
👷 Slower builds, higher standards
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think this 'diplomacy igloo' will hold for Syria?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
✅
Yes, failure isn't an option (56%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️
❌
No, the gaps are too vast (41%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write us!) (3%)
Your two cents:
✅
A.L:
“Failure is still possible, but too many have too much to gain to allow the igloo to crumble.”
❌
M.G:
“There are too many wildcard variables surrounding Syria — Israel, Iran, Turkey, Iraq — with too many contradictory agendas and motivations.”
✍️
A.R:
“There is one (morbid) risk you did not cover — assassination. If al-Sharaa falls, someone else will need to step up or risk a resurgent civil war.”