URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/guterres-invokes-article-99
Title: 🌍 Guterres invokes article 99

Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
A member of Team Intrigue attended the Aspen Security Forum in DC last night - it’s a top conference on security, intel and diplomacy. While the event featured a solid line-up, the audience vibes suggested there was one clear star of the show:
David Cameron
.
The former UK prime minister (and now foreign secretary) gave an impassioned defence of US support for Ukraine, drew a big audience laugh by referring to himself as an “
expert in referendums
”, then hung around to greet a long queue of influential well-wishers.
Of course, Cameron has his fair share of critics, so I can’t help but wonder if this warm reception reflected a bit of nostalgia for the era when he was prime minister (2010 to 2016).
It’s a more complex world today, reflected in our below briefing on the
UN chief’s rare decision to invoke Article 99
of the UN Charter.
- Jeremy Dicker, Managing Editor
Not a subscriber? Join here!
TODAY’S NEWS
Hack and leak.
The UK has accused a group “
almost certainly
” linked to Russian intelligence of carrying out a years-long hack-and-leak campaign to interfere in British democracy. The UK’s
statement
(in coordination with the US) points the finger at a group known as Star Blizzard, which is known to conduct surveillance on its high-profile targets. Russia hasn’t yet addressed the allegations.
Duelling claims.
Israel has released maps, satellite photos, and video footage it says show that Hamas has fired rockets towards Israel from areas in southern Gaza where civilians were seeking shelter. Separately, watchdog group Human Rights Watch has released a
report
claiming that an Israeli strike that killed a Reuters videographer on 13 October appeared to be deliberate.
Charm offensive.
Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan has made his first trip to Athens since 2017 for talks with his Greek counterpart Kyriakos Mitsotakis. It’s an effort to ease the neighbours’ long-standing tensions over territory, history, and beyond. The two struck a pretty positive tone in public, with Erdogan saying, “
there’s no problem that cannot be solved between us.
”
ECB promises to bare its teeth.
The European Central Bank (ECB) has warned that banks dragging their feet responding to regulatory requests will face tougher fines. The ECB has tended to impose smaller fines than US and UK regulators, but it’s now promising a tougher approach, particularly towards banks reluctant to tackle climate risks in their portfolios.
TOP STORY
António Guterres, and a satellite image after Israeli operations in Beit Hanoun, northern Gaza
Guterres invokes Article 99 in the UN Charter
UN Secretary-General António Guterres invoked Article 99 of the
UN charter
yesterday, stepping up pressure on the UN Security Council to declare a humanitarian ceasefire in Gaza and “
help avert a humanitarian catastrophe
”.
What’s Article 99?
It empowers the Secretary-General to bring to the Security Council’s attention
“any matter which in his opinion may threaten the maintenance of international peace and security.”
In his
letter
, Guterres says:
"
More than
eight weeks of hostilities
in Gaza and Israel have created appalling human suffering, physical destruction and collective trauma across Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territory.
"
He condemns the "
the
abhorrent acts of terror by Hamas
" on 7 October, calls for the ~130 remaining hostages to be "
immediately and unconditionally released
", and says "
accounts of sexual violence during the attacks are appalling
".
And referring to Israel's response in Gaza, he says, “
more than 15,000 people have reportedly been killed
”, "
more than half of all homes have been destroyed
", "
there is
no effective protection of civilians
", and "
the situation is fast deteriorating into a catastrophe
".
As bureaucratic as writing a letter might sound, Article 99 is basically
the only independent political tool
the UN chief has. And in practice, it means he now gets the right to speak to the Security Council rather than await an invite.
Of course, wrapped up in Article 99 is an implicit criticism by a Secretary-General that the Security Council hasn’t been doing its job. That’s why it’s only been invoked
explicitly
three times in the UN’s 78-year history
, including:
In 1960, responding to the Congo’s request for UN troops
In 1979, responding to the seizure of the US embassy in Iran, and
In 1989, calling for an end to the Lebanese civil war.
And in these three cases, the Council went on to issue a resolution within days, reflecting the fact the UN chiefs at the time were pushing on an open door.
So here we are in 2023, and the UN Security Council has duly called an emergency meeting for this morning (New York time) in response to the UN chief’s letter.
But few would describe Guterres as pushing on an open door this time. It took the Council more than five weeks to adopt its
first and only resolution
on Israel-Hamas. And that was after four failed attempts, including:
One vetoed by the US
(Israel’s top ally) because the draft “
did not mention Israel’s right of self-defence
”, and
One vetoed by China and Russia
because the draft didn’t “
reflect the world's strongest calls for a ceasefire
”.
The sheer rarity of Article 99 gives the Secretary-General’s move symbolic and political weight, but will it actually change anything?
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
The UAE (currently a member of the Council) plans to put forward a resolution calling for “
an immediate humanitarian ceasefire
” during this morning’s emergency meeting.
It reportedly will not include amendments submitted by the US, including a condemnation of Hamas, a call for both Palestinian and Israeli civilians to be protected, and a call for the immediate release of all hostages.
The US Deputy Ambassador to the UN, Robert Wood, has already hinted at his country’s position, saying a resolution “
would not be useful
” right now.
So, given the basic calculations among the key Council members seem unchanged, it’s hard to see any resolution passing.
Also worth noting:
Responding to the Article 99 news, Israel’s ambassador to the UN
said
the “
distorted positions of the Secretary-General only prolong the fighting in Gaza, because they give hope to the Hamas terrorists that the war will be stopped and they will be able to survive.
”
Share the Intrigue
NEW INTERNATIONAL INTRIGUE STICKER PACK!
You heard that right, new stickers, just for you!
Some of you super fans have already earned your stripes (or stickers, rather), but we have good news for those who are still hoping to climb Intrigue’s ladder of referral notoriety:
We made a brand-new sticker pack! Complete with three new styles for your suitcase, computer case, water bottle, and more.
To get them, all you need is to recommend Intrigue to eight friends or family (using your unique referral link below).
P.S. If you’ve already reached sticker pack status, but never get around to submitting your address - hit reply and get in touch!
A COP DARK SIDE?
We’ve worked at plenty of global summits, including in our former lives as diplomats. Summits are exhilarating, frustrating, surreal, and essential parts of how our world works.
But they have a dark side, too. Trusted friends have passed us some information on one such dark side now playing out in the margins of the COP28 climate talks in Dubai:
sex trafficking
. You can read more on our website
here
.
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇦🇿
Azerbaijan
: President Ilham Aliyev has called a
snap election
for 7 February. He’s been president since 2003 and has been riding a wave of popularity since Azerbaijan seized the ethnic Armenian enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh in a lightning military operation this September.
🇩🇰
Denmark
: Parliament has passed legislation to outlaw the
desecration of holy books
after a series of high-profile Quran burnings. Some opponents of the bill said the government was infringing on freedom of speech.
🇸🇬
Singapore
: China and Singapore have agreed to initiate a 30-day
visa-free reciprocal travel program
starting next year. Malaysia and Thailand have similar programs in place for Chinese tourists.
🇲🇽
Mexico:
The US and Mexico have agreed to
more-closely monitor foreign capital
in Mexico amid soaring Chinese investment there. Mexico is by far America’s largest trading partner, accounting for more than $850B in bilateral trade last year.
🇸🇨
Seychelles
: President Wavel Ramkalawan has declared a state of emergency in Seychelles after a
huge explosion at a mining company
wrought destruction along the main island’s east coast. Heavy rains and flooding overnight have complicated the emergency response.
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Some weekend recommendations if (like our very own Ethan) you happen to find yourself in
🇲🇽
Mexico City this weekend
Eat:
Swing by Taqueria Orinoco for their al pastor tacos. This place is on every must-eat list for good reason!
Explore:
Built on a Mexican-American War battlefield, the
Museo Nacional de las Intervenciones
is a hidden gem of a museum that recounts the many wars fought on Mexican soil.
Shop:
If you need an authentic souvenir, there’s no better place than the massive
Mercado de Artesanías La Ciudadela
near the city’s centre.
Got weekend tips for another city? Hit reply and send them in!
EMBASSY OF THE DAY
It may not get much hipper than Italy’s embassy in Brazil, which was completed in 1977 and designed by Pier Luigi Nervi, a legend of Italian design. Nervi was famous for his use of reinforced concrete, which he moulded into ‘quadricuspid’ columns for this project, giving the embassy a lightness and upward movement over the lake underneath.
Pretty, pretty, pretty good.
FRIDAY QUIZ
1) Which two countries share the longest land border in the world?
a) Canada - US
b) Argentina - Chile
c) Russia-Kazakhstan
d) China - Mongolia
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) How many countries grant visa-free entry to Afghan passport holders?
a) 3
b) 14
c) 27
d) 56
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) Which of the following shares a land border with more than one country?
a) The Gambia
b) Norway
c) Portugal
d) Qatar
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Share the newsletter