URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/highlights-xiangshan-security-forum
Title: 🌍 Highlights from the Xiangshan security forum

Today’s newsletter supported by:
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Today’s word of the day is ‘jaysus’. It’s used in Indonesia to describe an unfunny joke that’s told so badly, you actually laugh.
Today’s briefing is a 5 min read:
🇨🇳
The
Xiangshan
security summit in
China
.
🇶🇦
How
Qatar
became the world’s go-to mediator.
➕
Plus:
Meta’s social media dominance, how the papers are covering a mob storming an airport in Russia, and an unexpected link between a world leader and Hollywood.
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇯🇵
Japan
: The US military says it’ll start
buying local seafood
to supply its troops in Japan, to help offset China’s ban. Beijing banned the import of Japanese seafood following Tokyo’s release of treated wastewater from the Fukushima power plant earlier this year.
🇩🇪
Germany
: Europe’s largest economy
shrank slightly (0.1%) last quarter
, raising concerns that Germany is heading towards a recession. The country’s export-heavy economy has struggled with energy volatility, stubbornly high inflation, and tepid global demand.
🇧🇩
Bangladesh
: Authorities have
arrested
the opposition leader after mass protests rocked the capital with calls for Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina’s resignation. Critics accuse Hasina, who’s been in power since 2009, of targeting her political opponents.
🇵🇦
Panama
: The government has announced a
referendum
on the future of the country’s vast Cobre Panama copper mine after days of mass protests. Discontent erupted after authorities renewed a Canadian mining giant’s licence, allegedly without proper scrutiny.
🇨🇬
Republic of the
Congo
: Leaders from countries home to the world’s biggest rainforests
have met in Brazzaville
to discuss defending their shared ecosystems. They agreed on a seven point plan, but fell short of any binding pact.
🇨🇳
China | Geopolitics
Zhang Youxia, China’s #2 military chief, kicks off the 10th Beijing Xiangshan Forum. Credits: CGTN
What happened at Xiangshan this week?
Military and other leaders from 90 countries will today wrap up three days of security talks in Beijing for this year’s annual
Xiangshan Forum
. Launched in 2006, this is the event’s first in-person iteration since  before COVID.
Didn’t make it along? Here are some of the more intriguing moments:
🤝
US-China
:
China’s decision to invite the US is a
signal
it’s open to re-engaging, after cutting military ties when Nancy Pelosi visited Taiwan last year. But top brass
Zhang Youxia still took a veiled swipe at the US in his keynote address, claiming “
certain countries keep stirring up trouble around the world
”.
📢
Global Security Initiative
(
GSI
): Beijing also promoted
its
GSI
, which President Xi first announced last year. It’s still thin on details, but officials used the concept to highlight the US-led world order’s shortcomings, while packaging China’s wins (like its earlier brokering of Saudi-Iran ties) as representing a viable alternative.
🌎 And the main guest
was Russian Defence Minister Shoigu (one of 22 defence ministers there), who
accused
the US of “
steady escalation…
fraught with catastrophic consequences
”.
Intrigue's take:
This kind of military diplomacy is on-brand for China:
The event’s theme was ‘
Common Security, Lasting Peace
’, and
Its guest list and program both emphasised the ‘Global South’.
It all sought to project China as a source of peace and stability. Meanwhile, nations with a different view of China (like
the Philippines
) opted to send a lower-level delegation, or just skipped the forum altogether.
Also worth noting:
Presidents Xi and Biden have reportedly
agreed to meet
in San Francisco next month. The two leaders last met in November 2022.
🎧 Intrigue Outloud
Need to catch Intrigue on the go?
Intrigue Outloud is your favourite geopolitics newsletter delivered to your
podcast
app of choice, with extra insights from host Ethan Plotkin and Intrigue co-founder John Fowler.
On today's episode:
Is Bangladesh’s democracy in danger?
🎧 Listen here!
📰
How newspapers covered…
A mob storming an airport in Russia’s Dagestan
London, UK
“Mob storms Dagestan airport in search of Jewish passengers from Israel”
Brussels, Belgium
“Russian security forces remove antisemitic lynch mob from Dagestan airport”
Moscow, Russia
“Russia’s Human Rights Commissioner urges Dagestan residents not to succumb to provocations”
Today’s newsletter is supported by: The Daily Upside
Market Update: Please Read
In this current market landscape, we all face a common challenge.
Many conventional financial news sources are driven by the pursuit of maximum clicks. Consequently, they resort to disingenuous headlines and fear-based tactics to meet their bottom line. In a new cycle filled with mundane headlines and shallow social media posts, it’s essential to seek out only the highest quality sources of information and analysis.
Fortunately, we’ve found one.
Meet The Daily Upside. Founded by a team of investment bankers, scholars, and journalists, this free business newsletter has a singular mission: to empower you with market intelligence and facilitate wealth creation.
Sent to your inbox before markets open, this free newsletter is a trove of concise insights, in-depth analysis, and a dose of wit, all aimed at making you a more well-rounded investor.
Join managing directors and principals at some of Wall Street’s largest institutions who read The Daily Upside every morning.
Sign up for free here.
🇶🇦
Qatar | Geopolitics
Qatar and its emir, Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani, have emerged as key players
Qatar steps into the diplomatic void
Qatar has emerged as the lead intermediary between Israel and Hamas.
Doha’s ties to Hamas run deep:
it’s hosted the group’s political leadership since 2012 and (with Israeli agreement) has long transferred $30M to Gaza each month, which it
says
goes to humanitarian and administrative activities.
But Qatar also has solid links with the West: the US
declared
it a ‘
major non-NATO ally
’ last year. Plus Doha has maintained contact (if not formal ties) with Israel since the 1990s.
Intrigue’s take:
Qatar is not exactly neutral here; it held Israel “
solely responsible
” for the Hamas attacks on October 7th.
But intriguingly, Israel’s own national security advisor is now
describing
Qatar as “
essential
” and “
crucial
”.
So Qatar will have questions to answer after the war - like the nature of its support for Hamas, and the tenor of its
state-funded broadcaster’s coverage
- but for now, the region needs an intermediary. And Qatar is it.
Also worth noting:
Israel’s
spy chief was in Qatar
over the weekend to discuss ways to secure the release of the ~235 hostages held by Hamas.
➕
Extra Intrigue
Here’s what folks around the world have been tweeting about
🇨🇦
Canadians
were posting about the late
Friends
star
“Matthew Perry”
,
who was a childhood classmate of
Prime Minister Trudeau
.
🇨🇴
Colombians
were using
“#Diaz”
for Luis Diaz, a Liverpool footballer whose
parents were kidnapped
near the Venezuelan border.
🇺🇸
And
Americans
tweeted about
“UAW”
,
the autoworker union that
reached a tentative deal
with General Motors after a six-week strike.
🗳️ Poll time!
Would you buy and eat Japanese seafood?
(The International Atomic Energy Agency says Japan's release of treated nuclear wastewater meets international safety standards)
🐟 Yes, absolutely
🤔 No, I'm not convinced
⛔ I hate seafood
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
📊
Chart of the day
Credits: Chartr
Meta seems to be crushing the social media game. The tech giant, which owns Facebook, Instagram, WhatsApp and more, says
3.88 billion people
(or half the world’s population) use at least one of its products each month.
Yesterday’s poll:
Kenya has announced it'll allow visa-free arrivals for all African citizens. Do you think this is a model worth following elsewhere in the world?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
👍 Yes, it'll promote tourism and business (56%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️ 👎 No, border control goes to the heart of national sovereignty (41%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!)  (3%)
Your two cents
:
👍
A.W:
“A positive move, reduce paperwork, encourage trade, build strong cross border bonds.”
✍️
J.B:
“It depends on location. In an area with high levels of unrest, it can make it easier for that unrest to spread.”