URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/hottest-ipos-of-2025-4d5f314edcfd7760
Title: 🌍 Hottest IPOs of 2025

Today’s briefing:
— World’s most intriguing IPOs
— The Intrigue jobs board
— The ambassador said what?
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Initial public offerings (IPOs) can tell us a lot about the state of the global markets, including sectoral focuses, supply chain bottlenecks, and general investor confidence.
The
types
of companies going to IPO also reveal plenty about our world. Ten years ago, the hottest IPOs boasted the likes of burger franchises, renewable energy developers, and fitness wearables.
Skip forward to 2025, and the global IPO scene is looking rather different. We’ll dive into that in our top briefing today.
Number of the day
6,000
That’s how many employees Microsoft just announced it’ll let go, or roughly 3% of its total headcount. The firm recently reported better-than-expected quarterly net income of $26B, and says it’s aiming to reduce management layers ahead.
Business x Geopolitics
It’s hump day, and that’s as good a reason as any to look at
five of the most intriguing IPOs we’re tracking this year, and what they mean for our world:
🇨🇳
CATL
- China’s battery giant
Contemporary Amperex Technology Co Ltd
, or CATL among friends, is raising $4B via Hong Kong from next week, in what’s the world’s biggest IPO so far this year.
Why we’re interested
- CATL is the world’s biggest EV battery-maker, making it not only key to the world’s energy transition, but also a target of
a)
US tariffs since 2018, and
b)
Biden’s incentives for more US-made alternatives. So it’s been more focused on Europe.
But that puts
Europe in a bind
, as the continent tries to balance its immediate thirst for tech, investment, and local production, versus its longer term desire to curb any dependence on China. You can see that bind in Europe’s mix of local incentives plus tariffs on China-made cars, as well as CATL’s response via local plants in Germany and Hungary.
🇯🇵
JX Advanced Metals
- Japan’s chip metals guru
JX Advanced Metals
raised a cool $3B in March — Japan’s biggest IPO in seven years.
Why we’re interested
- JX obviously does metals (advanced ones, to be precise), but its top customers include chipmakers. That’s why its decision to go public was a surprise given some of its presumed clients (think Samsung, Intel) are on struggle street right now. It’s down 7% since IPO.
🇩🇪
Thyssenkrupp Marine Systems (TKMS)
- Germany’s naval player
Thyssenkrupp chief Miguel López has revealed he’s looking to spin off his naval division into a new firm this year, streamlining operations and raising cash to ride Europe’s re-arming (plus offload a bit of debt while he’s at it).
Why we’re interested
- TKMS is just one of dozens more defence and aerospace firms in the IPO pipeline, as the private sector picks up what spooked governments are putting down (“
help
”). Markets are also now awash with managers loosening their ethical rules, as investors both
a)
get FOMO, and
b)
re-think defence’s role in a free world under pressure.
🇺🇸
Venture Global
- America’s LNG underdog
LNG exporter Venture Global raised $1.75B back in January, but quickly became a cautionary tale after its shares tanked over 60%.
Why we’re interested
- You might expect an LNG player like Venture to go to the moon on Trump’s ‘
drill, baby drill
’, but it’s a little more nuanced: there are some specific Venture issues at play, but also — it’s an increasingly competitive sector with over-supply risks ahead, while Europe’s mild winter and healthy storage levels have curbed demand.
Still, Trump 2.0 is already shaping the firm’s fortunes, approving a massive new facility in Louisiana as the firm bets on decades more LNG demand ahead.
🇨🇳
Shein
- China’s fast-fashion colossus
The $50B provider of everything from mankini-clad garden gnomes to shark slippers for hamsters had wanted to raise in the US last year, until it hit
interlinked regulatory, political, and geopolitical walls
.
It then set its eyes on London’s hungrier IPO market and just got approvals last month, but chatter is really quietening down as Shein grapples with Trump’s new tariffs, plus continued British scrutiny over the firm’s human rights record.
Why we’re interested
- Shein is the perfect example of a firm upended overnight by geopolitics: pre-
Liberation Day,
it could sell to US consumers mostly duty-free. That’s why Shein and Temu sent 1.4
billion
packages to the US last year. But of course, it was tough for US firms to compete — how do you make a garden gnome in a mankini for $2?
Or come to think of it, why?
Intrigue’s Take
IPOs offer some sharp signals on where our world is headed. Here are three:
ESG
(environmental, social, and governance) concerns keep evolving: while there’s growing scrutiny on how firms like Shein can do their thing, there’s arguably less on how or why TKMS (defence) and Venture (energy) now do theirs. But geopolitical drivers sit behind all three evolutions, in our view.
Local politics
can be existential: the US is Shein’s biggest market, accounting for up to half its $40B global revenue. So Shein is facing a massive hit this year, though solutions are also local — the firm already opened hubs in Indiana and California plus a logistics facility in Washington state, partly to curb its exposure.
Longer-term trends still hold
: our world is still fundamentally worried about longer-term energy security, particularly as data centres fuel demand. And you can see that in the figures: the energy sector’s IPO pipeline has more than doubled year-on-year, but actual completed listings have dropped — that’s long-term optimism clashing with some immediate volatility and uncertainty.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
BOXABL
Could This Company Do for Housing What Tesla Did for Cars?
Most car factories like Ford or Tesla reportedly build one car per minute. Isn’t it time we do that for houses? BOXABL believes they have the potential to disrupt a massive and outdated trillion dollar building construction market.
Following an initial prototype order from SpaceX as well as an order for 156 homes from the DoD, BOXABL has made substantial strides in streamlining their assembly line automated manufacturing and order process. They just reserved the ticker symbol BXBL on Nasdaq*
BOXABL has raised over $170M from over 40,000 investors since 2020. To date, Boxabl raised over 50% of their Reg A+ funding limit! BOXABL is only accepting investment on their website until the Reg A+ is full.
Invest now before it’s too late!
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇸🇾
SYRIA
-
US to lift sanctions.
As we foreshadowed, President Trump has announced in Riyadh he’ll lift US sanctions on Syria to give the newly Assad-free country “
a chance at greatness
”.  He’s set to meet Syria’s leader al-Sharaa today (Wednesday) before jetting to Qatar. Meanwhile, the Saudis have pledged $600B in US-bound investments. (
CNN
)
Comment:
Trump’s announcement got a standing ovation in Riyadh, but you can add it to his list of irritants with Israel, which has been bombing Syrian targets, citing the jihadi roots of its new ruling factions. There’ll also be divisions within Trump’s team, with his spymaster (Gabbard) famously sceptical of Syria’s anti-Assad forces.
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
Boeing stocks rally as Beijing lifts restrictions.
Following the weekend’s US-China trade truce, Beijing is now lifting its Boeing restrictions, meaning the US firm can now resume deliveries to China’s airlines (though details are still TBC). (
Wall Street Journal
$)
Comment:
This past week has been a vindication for any traders who bet that Trump’s Liberation Day tariffs (and China’s response) would be wound back. The S&P500 has now recovered beyond its pre-Liberation levels. Foreign capitals, however, tend to have longer memories than markets.
🇱🇾
LIBYA
-
Killing of militia leader sparks clashes in capital.
Someone has killed Gheniwa, one of the many militia leaders now ruling Libya, triggering a night of violence in Tripoli that’s left at least six dead. (
The Guardian
)
🇵🇱
POLAND
-
Poles love polls.
Voters are set to elect a new president this Sunday, and while the presidency is largely ceremonial, the race is still a barometer: interestingly, some candidates are downplaying their support for neighbouring Ukraine, reflecting local fatigue. (
AP
)
🇹🇭
THAILAND
-
Search ends at quake-hit skyscraper.
More than a month after a 7.7 magnitude earthquake rocked the region, authorities have halted search operations at a collapsed skyscraper that left at least 89 dead. They’re still investigating why this was the sole structure to collapse. (
The Strait Times
)
🇩🇴
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
-
Kenya and DR call for more Haiti support.
Top Dominican and Kenyan diplomats have agreed for injured Kenyan peacekeepers in crisis-hit neighbouring Haiti to get care in the Dominican Republic. (
Africanews
)
Comment:
The bigger message here was really that we’re doing our part, so where’s everyone else? Despite the presence of 1,000 security personnel (mostly Kenyan police), Haiti’s gangs have further expanded their territorial control this year.
🇿🇲
ZAMBIA
-
Diplomats warned against interference.
US-Zambia tensions have flared after the US ambassador suggested Zambia is allowing "
systematic theft
" of medical donations. In response, Zambia’s foreign minister has warned foreign diplomats to stay out of domestic affairs. (
BBC
)
Extra Intrigue
The Intrigue jobs board
💼
Global business development @
NBA
in New York
Content creator
@
Lego
in Singapore
Political adviser
@
ICRC
in Nairobi
Director, China Offshore Wealth @
BlackRock
in Hong Kong
From our sponsor
10 Amazon Prime Perks Every Smart Shopper Should Know.
Most people think Amazon Prime is just for free shipping and streaming movies—but there’s so much more. Brad’s Deals rounded up 10 lesser-known Prime perks that can help you save money, time, and stress. From exclusive coupons and early access to deals to free music, Whole Foods discounts, and even prescription savings, these hidden benefits make your membership even more valuable.
See All 10 Prime Perks Now
Today’s poll
If you had a spare $1M, which sector would you bet on?
🛢️ Energy
🖥️ Tech
🚀 Aerospace & defence
💉 Healthcare
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Which part of Trump's trip do you think matters the most?
🇸🇦
Saudi Arabia (69%)
🇶🇦
Qatar (15%)
🇦🇪
UAE (10%)
✍️ Other (write us!) (5%)
Your two cents:
🇸🇦
C.D.J:
“The Saudis are still the region's biggest dog in many ways…”
✍️
S.J.P:
“What is most intriguing is where Trump
didn’t
visit. Not seeing his mate Bibi while in the neighbourhood suggests all’s not well.”
✍️
W.B.B:
“If direct Russia-Ukraine talks end up happening in Istanbul this week, that’ll trump it all.”
✍️ Corrections corner
Thanks to Alberto for pointing out that Jane Fraser is head of
Citigroup
(not Fidelity)!
🤦