URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/houthi-highjacking-exposes-weakness-global-trade
Title: 🌍 Houthi highjacking exposes weakness of global trade

Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
I’m delighted to let you know that news of our successful US$1.75M raise was
featured in Axios yesterday
. Our mission to make global affairs news accessible, actionable and engaging has resonated with more than 70,000 of you already… and we’re just getting started!
I couldn’t be prouder of our team, and I couldn’t be more grateful to each and every one of you who has read even a single edition of International Intrigue. Thank you. (PS. Please keep forwarding the newsletter to anyone you think would enjoy it - it helps us more than you realise!)
With that, back to our regular programming: as we foreshadowed yesterday, an
Israel-Hamas deal
has just been announced, we’re tracking how
Houthi rebels hijacking a cargo ship in the Red Sea
via helicopter will affect global trade, and
Sam Altman
is somehow now back again as OpenAI CEO. You couldn’t make the news up if you tried.
- John Fowler, Co-Founder
Not a subscriber? Join here!
TODAY’S NEWS
Done deal.
Israel’s cabinet has just approved a temporary, four-day pause in fighting, in exchange for 50 hostages (mostly women and children) Hamas has held since 7 October. The Israeli prime minister’s office says it will pause fighting for an additional day for every ten additional hostages Hamas frees.
US troops under fire.
A Pentagon spokesperson told reporters yesterday (Tuesday) that several US troops at Al-Asad Air Base in Iraq were injured during a recent missile attack by Iran-backed militias. The US military says it’s documented 66 attacks against its personnel in Syria and Iraq since 17 October.
Binance, sell.
Binance, the world’s largest crypto exchange, will pay a $4.3B fine (the largest in US Treasury history) for violating US money laundering rules. The company’s co-founder (Changpeng Zhao) has resigned as CEO, agreeing to pay a $50M fine. The crypto world still involves some high highs, and low lows.
North Korea’s first spy satellite.
Pyongyang says it launched its first spy satellite into orbit last night (Tuesday), after two failed launches earlier this year. While it’s caused concern in Japan, South Korea and the US, there are questions about the sophistication of North Korea’s space tech, if you catch our drift.
Sam’s back.
Just when we thought this saga had ended, OpenAI’s ousted co-founder (Sam Altman) has
announced
he’s back again as CEO. AI shapes our world, and people shape AI; that’s why the world is now watching Sam Altman.
TOP STORY
A still from the video of the hijacking of the Galaxy Leader released by the Houthis.
Houthis hijack ship in major global shipping lane
Yemen’s Houthi rebels have released footage of their Sunday hijacking of a cargo ship in the Red Sea’s international waters off Yemen.
The term ‘rebels’ implies a ragtag outfit, but
Houthi capabilities
include aircraft, drones, missiles, and troop
estimates
reaching up to 200,000 (the decentralised group draws on Yemen’s broader Houthi tribe, making precise numbers tricky).
The Iran-backed Houthis
say
they hijacked the massive Galaxy Leader ship in response to Israel’s “
heinous acts against our Palestinian brothers
”.
And the potential ripple effects here are big.
First,
this vessel
is a classic illustration of global shipping today. It was reportedly:
🇯🇵
Japan-operated
🇬🇷
Greece-managed
🇧🇸
Bahamas-flagged
🇮🇲
Isle of Mann (UK)-registered
🇮🇱
Part-owned by Rami Ungar (an Israeli billionaire)
🇹🇷
-
🇮🇳
Travelling from Turkey to India, and
🇧🇬
🇷🇴
🇺🇦
🇲🇽
🇵🇭
Bulgaria, Romania, Ukraine, Mexico and Philippines-crewed (all 25 of whom are now held hostage in Yemen’s Hodeidah port area).
That’s a lot of capitals now paying attention.
Second, the list of capitals paying attention gets longer when you consider that a
fifth of the world’s oil
passes through this chokepoint. At least two cargo ships have now diverted, and many were already diverting from the Panama Canal, where a drought has cut shipping capacity. Now, going the long way around Africa adds another
26 days
to the trip. And this all puts pressure on global trade.
Third, it’s a reminder for Israel
that its actions in Gaza will continue to face blowback around the world.
For now, Israel and the US are
blaming
Iran, which is
denying
any role, while Japan is making
direct contact
with the Houthis and urging others to help. France also
pointed out
that none of this helps Yemen’s impoverished people.
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
Given the critical importance of this waterway, the hijacking will inevitably draw more international naval assets to the region, raising the stakes higher.
And this, all just as Israel and Hamas agree to hit pause.
Also worth noting:
The US is reportedly reviewing whether to
restore the Houthi rebels to the US terrorist list
, after removing them from the blacklist in 2021 to assist with humanitarian assistance to Yemen.
After the US-led invasion of Iraq in 2003, the Houthis adopted the slogan, “
God is great, death to the U.S., death to Israel, curse the Jews, and victory for Islam
”. A Houthi politburo member
tweeted
the same motto on Sunday.
Share the Intrigue
SUPPORTED BY THE DAILY UPSIDE
Market Update: Please Read
In this current market landscape, we all face a common challenge.
Many conventional financial news sources are driven by the pursuit of maximum clicks. Consequently, they resort to disingenuous headlines and fear-based tactics to meet their bottom line. In a news cycle filled with mundane headlines and shallow social media posts, it’s essential to seek out only the highest quality sources of information and analysis.
Fortunately, we’ve found one.
Meet The Daily Upside. Founded by a team of investment bankers, scholars, and journalists, this free business newsletter has a singular mission: to empower you with market intelligence and facilitate wealth creation.
Sent to your inbox before markets open, this free newsletter is a trove of concise insights, in-depth analysis, and a dose of wit, all aimed to make you a more well-rounded investor.
Don’t take our word for it — join hundreds of thousands of investors who trust The Daily Upside.
Sign up here.
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇯🇵
Japan
: Taiwan’s TSMC is reportedly considering opening up a
third semiconductor factory in Japan
to produce advanced 3-nanometer chips. If confirmed, this would be a win for Prime Minister Kishida who’s been seeking to elevate Japan as a semiconductor hub.
🇬🇧
UK
: Germany and the UK are discussing building an
undersea hydrogen pipeline
connecting the two countries across the North Sea. In its current ideation, the project would see hydrogen produced via the UK’s vast offshore wind reserves then piped and sold to Germany.
🇵🇭
Philippines
: The US and the Philippines have
re-launched joint patrols
of the South China Sea, years after halting them. During his recent US trip, President Marcos Jr hinted at rising tensions with China and warned that the situation in the region had “
become more dire
”.
🇧🇷
Brazil
: Authorities have recorded Brazil’s
hottest-ever temperature
(44.8C / 112.6F) in the country’s south-eastern state of Minas Gerais. A heatwave has touched parts of Brazil, while a drought has hit the Amazon river and its tributaries.
🇸🇦
Saudi Arabia
: The central banks of China and Saudi Arabia have signed a
currency swap worth nearly $7B
. Central banks use these swaps to boost liquidity, hedge risk, and foster investment and trade. Beijing currently has 29 active swaps, reportedly the most of any country.
ASK A DIPLOMAT: ROAD TO COP28
Our resident Intrigue diplomats have plenty of experience in the international conference game, which means we know how these things go down. So…
Drop your COP questions here, and we'll answer some this Friday!
✍️ Click here to submit your question!
✍️ Click here to submit your question!!
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
EXTRA INTRIGUE
What we’re reading about the world’s
entertainment industry
AI for lip dubbing could change the film industry
​​
Facing pressure in India, Netflix and Amazon back down on daring films
Meta brings us a step closer to AI-generated movies
The African film industry has come a long way, and still has further to go
PHOTO OF THE DAY
Credits: Florion Goga/Reuters.
Think your parliament is dysfunctional? Well, on Monday, opposition lawmakers in Albania upped the ante with smoke bombs and
a small fire
in the middle of the legislative chamber, to protest the government’s annual budget. An opposition figure said their goal was to
“bring pluralism to parliament.”
Yikes.
DAILY POLL
Who has the best drink?
🇮🇳 Chai
🇵🇾 / 🇦🇷 / 🇺🇾 Mate
🇸🇳 Bissap
🇰🇷 Soju
🇮🇪 Guinness
🇹🇼 Boba / bubble tea
🇲🇦 Mint tea
🇰🇿 Kumis
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you support a ceasefire in Gaza? Why or why not?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
👍 Yes (62%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️ 👎 No (35%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write-in) (3%)
Your two cents:
👍
M.A:
“Eliminating Hamas brutally and with thousands of innocent casualties will not stop violence, but clearly create more hate towards Israel among the affected Palestinian population and lay the foundation for a worse future terrorist organisation.”
👎
S.S:
“It will just get Hamas to regroup and resupply. That will prolong the war.”
✍️
M.P:
“Israel should scale back their forces significantly and conform to International Law. The Israeli government should support the typical tactics of negotiations and increased intelligence with high accuracy strikes using drones, etc. instead of the current rampage that kills everyone (including many children and even possibly hostages). [but] I think a complete ceasefire would not make sense as Hamas still is sending rockets and has hostages.”
Share the newsletter