URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/how-the-war-is-re-writing-your-day
Title: 🌍 How the war is re-writing your day

Today’s briefing:
— How the war is re-writing your day
— Don’t get caught zip-lining like this
— A hotel shaped like what?!
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Spend enough time in an earthquake zone and you’ll eventually develop your own instinctive early-warning system, whether it’s the barking huskies or fleeing pigeons. In my case, it’s always the delicate jingle of martini glasses on a shelf, like some yuppie canary.
That’s my way of introducing today’s briefing: while Brent prices and tanker counts might sound the alarm, we’re following
the war’s human signals
— think new restaurant rules in Cairo, idle delivery riders in Delhi, and diesel-dependent bakeries in Lagos. Onwards.
PS
— We’ll take
a short break
this Friday 3rd and Monday 6th April.
Intrigue insight: Iran war, day 31
On the battlefield:
Yemen’s Iran-backed
Houthis
have now joined the war by attacking Israel with missiles, though they’re not
yet
targeting ships in the Red Sea.
Hundreds of
US special forces
have arrived in the region as President Trump tells The Financial Times he might seize Iran’s
Kharg
Island oil hub. He’s also told The Wall Street Journal he could approve a raid to extract ~450kg of Iran’s
uranium
.
Meanwhile, Iran’s daily launches and accuracy are both now reportedly
up
from last week, even scoring a hit on a
US E-3 Sentry
radar aircraft at a Saudi airbase — valued at ~$500M, it was one of only ~16 such air force units still operational.
Markets
President Trump now claims Iran will allow 20 oil tankers through Hormuz as a “
sign of respect
”, though Iran is openly accusing the US president of just wielding optimistic rhetoric as a tool to suppress oil prices (aka
jaw-boning
).
Aluminium
prices are also up ~6% (near four-year highs) after Iran hit major smelters in the UAE and Bahrain. The Gulf handles roughly 9% of global supply.
Other
A UK campaign group is warning that Emirati authorities have
arrested up to 70 Brits
for posting videos of Iranian drone attacks. With ~70% of its GDP now coming from non-oil sectors, the UAE has a lot riding on its reputation for security.
Pain quotidien
As the Houthis now join the fray, and crude pushes back above $110, we'll see more headlines capturing the ripples across every part of our day, starting with that...
⏰
Morning alarm
Some workers might now smash the snooze button, with
Pakistan
and the
Philippines
moving to a four-day week for bureaucrats —
Sri Lanka
has gone a step further and declared every Wednesday a full public holiday! It's all an effort to curb fuel use.
Meanwhile, many folks in
India
need to wake up earlier to pack their own lunch now that several tech giants are winding down their staff cafeterias amid a shortage of LPG (popular cooking fuel).
Anyway, it's time for your...
🚗
Work commute
While many like
Vietnam
and
Thailand
are now pushing work-from-home, and parents in
Pakistan
will need it amid mandatory school closures, commuters elsewhere have faced big gas station queues in parts of
China
(Jiangsu/Suzhou),
Indonesia
(Yogyakarta), and beyond — it’s a function of panic-buying rather than actual shortages at this stage.
Meanwhile, Beijing is quietly and selectively easing its
export ban on refined fuels
— the idea was to stabilise prices and curb local discontent, but it was also a curve-ball for neighbours like the Philippines that rely on China for half their refined fuels. We say ‘selectively’ because while Manila is getting China’s fuel again, others like Australia are not.
Anyway, you finally make it into...
🏢
The office
As you arrive downtown, you might start to notice some changes: in
Bangkok
, for example, several buildings are curbing AC and even elevator use. So by the time you hike up 15 floors and stagger to your prime cubicle, you will be schvitzing.
And of course, folks working outside will feel it too, whether it’s
Manila
’s iconic jeepney drivers seeing their take-home incomes halve amid fewer trips and higher costs, or the million delivery workers on
India
's dominant Swiggy and Zomato platforms seeing their orders halve amid the LPG shortage hitting restaurants.
Anyway, you've fired off an email and consulted a stakeholder, so it must be time for...
🍲
Lunch
Bakeries in
Lagos
are having to pour extra diesel into their generators amid worsening blackouts — the city's grid problems pre-date Iran, but this Hormuz squeeze is exacerbating it all, and Nigeria's food inflation has now spiked as a result.
But it's not just bakers in Lagos. The fertiliser squeeze we foreshadowed weeks ago is now prompting farmers to delay or reduce usage, whether it's corn belt growers in
the US
, maize farmers in
East Africa
, or
Bangladeshi
rice farmers entering Boro (growing) season. So we're now locking lower yields and higher prices into the year ahead.
Anyway, if you're in
Kuwait
, your new six-hour workday now means you can head home a little after lunch, but...
🌃
Evening plans
If you're in
Mauritius
, don't expect to gaze upon any fountains or decorative lights on your commute home, nor even enjoy a dip in your heated pool back home — these are now officially non-essential activities banned from the electricity grid.
But if you're in
Cairo
and plan to grab dinner with friends instead, Egypt has introduced a nationwide curfew for all restaurants, cafes and malls — it's 9pm on weeknights, which only sounds late if you've never been to Egypt, where folks typically
start
dinner at 9pm.
Anyway, if all these rules are getting on your nerves, buying a ticket elsewhere will get trickier, too: several markets have now seen jet fuel prices double, nudging airlines from
Scandinavia
to
New Zealand
to start raising fares and/or cutting routes. Even in
the US
, United has now shaved 5% off its Q2 and Q3 capacity, the first major US carrier to do so.
And... that's your day, amid an oil crisis that’s barely shaving 10% off global supply!
Intrigue’s Take
Notice any patterns in our little whip-around-the-world above? The biggest we see is income: it’s the
developing world
now getting hit hardest and earliest, as wealthier nations (where most Intriguers live) can afford to pay a premium to guarantee supply.
We semi-saw that play out during the big 2022 LNG crisis, when a dozen tankers
changed course
mid-voyage
from Asia to Europe after Putin’s invasion — higher spot prices more than made up for any contract-breakage fees. Keep an eye out for similar reports this time (though LNG prices are still barely a third of 2022 peaks).
The other thing that strikes us is all the
Covid parallels
: work-from-home, restaurant curfews, school closures, grounded flights. In both cases, it’s about authorities deliberately destroying demand to slow a contagion, but this time the enemy is an oil shortage rather than a pathogen.
There are some similarities in the
inflation
risk, too, but whereas Covid’s inflation came via supply shocks meeting government-stimulated demand, this Iran inflation will not just be classic cost-push, but also a function of price-inelasticity: with a lot of oil use non-optional (at least short-term), those higher prices just mean less disposable income to buy other stuff, curbing broader growth. That’s where the spectre of stagflation comes in.
And eventually, perhaps like Covid, the daily disruption will be less some distant problem we ponder via our screens, and more something rattling those martini glasses at home.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
Grey Dynamics
Every major intelligence recruitment follows the same five-phase structure. Build rapport. Establish context. Align your offer with what the other person actually wants. Address their concerns before they raise them. Close with clarity.
This is the Pitch Framework. It is the same methodology CIA officers use to develop human sources, now taught to professionals in policy, finance, and corporate strategy.
Grey Dynamics’ HUMINT Fundamentals course is taught by Ray White, a retired CIA senior operations officer with 25+ years running the Agency’s largest training programme. You will learn why preparation is the pitch, why motivations drive everything, and why the best proposals never feel like proposals at all.
Download The Pitch Framework and see for yourself.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇨🇺
CUBA — Trump lets oil through.
The US is now granting a Russian tanker passage through Trump’s own oil blockade, allowing a rare delivery of ~730,000 barrels to Cuba. (
NYT
$)
Comment
:
Why? President Trump is framing it all as a pragmatic and humanitarian decision, though it could also reflect
a
) a preference to avoid unnecessary confrontation with Moscow right now, and/or
b
) ongoing talks with Havana.
🇲🇲
MYANMAR — Step down to step up.
Junta boss and coup-leader Min Aung Hlaing is stepping down as commander-in-chief to stand as president, handing the nominal reins to a loyalist spymaster. (
BBC
)
Comment
:
He’s trying to legitimise his rule with a veneer of democracy after recent sham elections: change the titles, keep the control. Before stepping down, he created a new Consultative Council that sits above everyone, with Min himself its likely chair.
🇫🇷
FRANCE — Caught in the lick of time.
French police have foiled an improvised explosive attack outside the Bank of America headquarters in Paris, citing links to the Iran war. (
CBS News
)
Comment:
It’s an example of the wartime brand risks now facing US companies.
🇨🇳
CHINA — Shh, diplomacy at work.
Manila and Beijing have resumed talks on shared oil and gas drilling amid China’s vast and
unlawful
claims to most of the South China Sea. (
Reuters
)
Comment:
While Beijing frames it all as routine diplomacy, the reality (said out-loud by Manila) is the Iran crisis is forcing both sides to reconsider their red lines to tap local energy supplies.
🇮🇩
INDONESIA
— Joint forces.
Ships from Russia’s Pacific fleet docked in Jakarta over the weekend ahead of planned joint exercises. (
Anadolu Ajansi
)
Comment:
It’s classic ‘free and active’ Indonesia: signing a US trade deal one month, then hosting Russian warships the next. Meanwhile, Putin gets to flex his reach and push back on Western efforts at isolation.
🇦🇷
ARGENTINA — Court orders.
A US appeals court has overturned a $16B judgment against Argentina over its 2012 nationalisation of Spanish energy firm YPF. (
AP
)
Comment
: It’s a big win for President Milei — by removing a major contingent liability, this boosts his ability to attract foreign investment, restructure debt, and burnishes his political brand as the one just cleaning up his predecessors’ mess.
🇸🇾
SYRIA — Back online.
Syria is seeking $1B in foreign investment to rebuild its postal system and expand its mobile infrastructure, with international players like Poste Italiane and France’s La Poste already showing interest. (
Bloomberg
$)
Comment:
It’s a relatively rare ‘open door’ moment in two strategic sectors, hence these risk-averse Western players thinking the opportunity might outweigh the risks.
Extra Intrigue
🤣
Your weekly roundup of the world’s lighter news
Someone has stolen a truck
transporting
over 12 tons of Formula 1-shaped Kit Kat chocolates from central Italy to Poland.
Authorities have
fined an Australian woman
after she stuck big googly eyes on a famous ‘Blue Blob’ sculpture.
A British woman is now doing jailtime after
getting caught ziplining and surfing
in Mexico while on disability benefits.
An Ohio firm has had to
recall its alcohol sterilising wipes
over possible microbial contamination.
And Quebec’s legislature has passed a unanimous vote
demanding Air Canada’s CEO resign
after he failed to speak French in a post-incident video.
Hotel of the day
Credits: Kremlin Palace
It’s an open secret Russians love southern Turkey, Antalya specifically.
So the Turks, already known for their glamorous hospitality, built an entire resort on the Mediterranean featuring replicas of the Kremlin, St. Basil's, and the Bolshoi Theatre!
Creatively named the
Kremlin Palace Resort
, the five-star hotel has actually been around since 2003 but underwent mass renovations post-Ukraine invasion to capitalise on the influx of cashed-up Muscovites no longer welcome elsewhere.
Just don’t expect the full authentic experience — in Turkey’s version of the Kremlin, if you submit a complaint, the hotel will just comp your cocktail rather than, you know, banish you to Siberia.
Today’s poll
Do you think Trump will order a ground operation against Iran in the next 10 days?
🪖 Yes, the military buildup isn't for nothing
🙅 No, he's bluffing
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Last Thursday’s poll:
Do you think Denmark's reality TV format could work well for other democracies?
(
memory jogger
: Denmark recently convinced all 12 party leaders to go on a pre-election reality TV program, in an effort to close the gap between citizens and government)
👍
Yes, it brings politicians closer to the ground (61%)
🚫
No, it cheapens the democratic process (34%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (5%)
Your two cents:
👍
L.D:
“Easier for the voters to understand individual ideologies and personalities as well as how the party members interact and work with each other.”
🚫
F.G:
“I just see a fist fight breaking out in my country’s case every other minute.”
✍️
D.A:
“It is the worst of all worlds: it takes away from the real issues, puts the focus on personality, and adds nothing to the understanding of government and its proper role. What's next, real housewives of politicians?“