URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/how-to-get-yelled-at-online
Title: 🌍 How to get yelled at online

Today’s briefing:
— How to get yelled at online
— This airline forgot it owned a Boeing 737
— They closed their embassy where?!
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. We take
one break
and all kinds of intrigue breaks out, whether it’s a coup in Guinea, wild weather in Asia, an ousted chief-of-staff in Ukraine (as we flagged), or even a surprise prime-ministerial wedding Down Under.
But today’s briefing takes us to a place 16th-century Portuguese sailors once dubbed the “
Ilha Formosa!
” (Beautiful Isle), now better known as Taiwan.
It’s home to the first foreign diplomat I ever met back as a kind of peace-corps volunteer in the Pacific Islands — vaguely aware of the whole ✌️China-Taiwan spat✌️, I politely noted it must be tricky serving as a Taiwanese diplomat, and a full four hours later, I staggered away, bleary-eyed with a magnificently robust understanding of just how difficult it was.
Anyway, the stakes just keep getting higher, and President Trump reportedly even nudged Japan’s prime minister to cool it last week (as we surmised). So today, we’re taking a quick look at
China’s
legal
claims: is Taiwan just a renegade province?
Number of the day
9.1%
That’s how much this year’s Black Friday online US sales grew compared to last year, according to Adobe Analytics. It could be a sign of a more robust US economy than expected, or maybe it’s jittery consumers deferring their purchases in hopes of a discount?
The leader doth protest too much
There are three guaranteed ways to get yelled at online:
i
) examining whether
Die Hard
belongs in the Christmas movie section,
ii
) examining whether pineapple belongs on pizza, and
iii
) examining whether Taiwan belongs to China.
The answer to both i) and ii) is clearly
yes
, but join us for iii) as we don some industrial-strength earmuffs and take a quick look at
Beijing's legal arguments over Taiwan
.
But first,
why?
Two reasons:
first
, Taiwan is now often (with the South China Sea) cited as the flashpoint that could end history’s longest stint without great-power war since Caesar; and
second
, while a top court already
reviewed
the South China Sea claims (turns out you can’t draw nine dashes on a map then declare it all yours), most Taiwan coverage only meekly notes
China sees the democracy as a renegade province
.
So given the stakes (WWIII?)
it makes sense to ask…
is
Taiwan a renegade province?
Beyond the former Qing dynasty’s two centuries of evolving control before ceding Taiwan to an aggressive Imperial Japan in 1895, Beijing’s modern
legal claims
often start with…
UN resolution 2758 (1971)
This was when a majority of the international community voted to recognise Beijing (not Taiwan) as "
the only legitimate representative
of China
to the United Nations
".
The text
, however, says nada about Taiwan belonging to China. Then there’s…
Your own 'One China' policy
Most of the world now has some kind of 'One China' policy, and (including for
the US
) it's broadly similar to that UN vote above: ie, recognising Beijing as the sole representative
of China
, rather than endorsing Beijing's claim that Taiwan belongs to China.
This gets into
Suits
territory
, but most capitals explicitly stop at just 'noting' or 'acknowledging' China’s territorial claims, rather than affirming or endorsing them.
And let’s not forget…
The Cairo (1943) and Potsdam (1945) declarations
Issued by
FDR/Truman, Churchill, and Chiang
(China's pre-communist ruler), these wartime statements said Japan should surrender Taiwan to Chiang's own
Republic
of China (which still runs Taiwan today). The three allies said nothing about handing Taiwan to today's
People's
Republic of China, which didn't yet exist, though some argue the intent automatically transfers to whoever's running the mainland.
It's also worth noting that these kinds of political statements (the
Cairo one
was a press release) can't legally transfer turf — that needs a
formal treaty
, which came later when Japan formally gave up Taiwan via the 1952 San Francisco Peace Treaty, in
a text
that’s silent on who should actually take over (Chiang was already in control there for years).
And finally, sitting right under our noses, let’s look at…
Taiwan's own claims
Taiwan technically still calls itself the Republic of China, and its founding 1947 constitution
still technically (if implausibly) claims China's entire mainland
(ditto China’s constitution re Taiwan) — it's one of many unresolved wounds from China's civil war.
But whereas Taiwan's
democratic transition
saw it abandon any pretence to ruling China, the mainland has instead doubled down on its Taiwan claims as its power has grown.
So
why doesn't Taiwan just change its name
and ditch its claims over the mainland? Beijing has made clear it’d see this as a declaration of independence, justifying an invasion.
Fun times. Anyway, you can add a million caveats to the above, but hopefully while hitting pause on your annual Christmas viewing of
Die Hard
to take a bite out of your ham n’ pineapple pizza, you can see that China’s
legal
case isn’t necessarily a slam dunk.
Intrigue’s Take
Diplomacy often thrives in this kind of intentional vagueness or constructive ambiguity, and things don’t get much more vague or ambiguous than when it comes to Taiwan.
Indeed, while leaders and diplomats will have clinked celebratory flutes over their studied silence in 1952 and 1971, or their careful wording to tip-toe around One China, it’s all precisely what’s brought us to today’s dilemma: a thriving democracy emerging out of the ambiguity, only to find itself sitting in the shadow of a giant who sees no ambiguity at all.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇭🇳
HONDURAS — Tense election.
Millions hit the polls Sunday amid not just mutual fraud recriminations, but also a last-minute intervention by President Trump — he warned of aid cuts if his preferred conservative didn’t win, then moved to pardon that party’s last president who’d just started 45 years in a US prison on drug trafficking charges! (
CNN
)
Comment
: That sentence alone could inspire a seven-part Netflix series, but somehow the more remarkable angle here might be the fact the two front-runners both want to reverse the leftist incumbent’s 2023 switch to Beijing, re-establishing ties with Taiwan! That’d be a big upset for China, which (according to those frontrunners) didn’t fully deliver on its big trade and investment promises. So the most nervous person in Tegucigalpa might not be any candidate, but Yu Bo (China’s ambassador).
🇮🇱
ISRAEL — Pardon?
Prime Minister Netanyahu has now formally asked President Herzog for a pardon in his own long-running corruption case, arguing it’s in the public interest to achieve national unity. Bibi’s request follows last month’s Trump letter in which the US president reiterated his own calls for Herzog to pardon the Israeli leader. (
CNN
)
🇻🇪
VENEZUELA — No skies ahead.
President Trump cryptically warned airlines to consider Venezuela’s airspace "
closed in its entirety
" over the weekend. (
President’s socials
)
Comment
: The US leader didn’t offer any further details, though it was presumably another attempt to rattle local autocrat Nicolás Maduro, who reportedly then dismissed Trump’s latest ultimatum to leave immediately or be forced out.
🇰🇿
KAZAKHSTAN
— Please stop?
Kazakhstan has protested after Ukrainian naval drones hit a Russian oil terminal in the Black Sea — it’s part of the Caspian Pipeline Consortium, which handles ~80% of Kazakhstan's oil exports and ~1% of global oil. Ukrainian drones also hit two sanctioned tankers headed for the very same terminal. (
NBC
)
Comment
: Hitting the sanctioned tankers is meant to send a message to the murky owners behind Russia’s shadow fleet: skirt the rules for a quick buck, and you might lose your entire tanker instead.
🇮🇩
INDONESIA — Deadly flooding.
Wild weather has left at least
900
dead across Thailand, Indonesia, and Sri Lanka in recent days, with rescue efforts still underway. A weakened Cyclone Ditwah has now pivoted away from Sri Lanka and is now battering southern India. (
Guardian
)
🇬🇼
GUINEA-BISSAU — Coup.
Guinea-Bissau’s former president (Embaló) has arrived in neighbouring Senegal after military officers deposed him in last week’s coup. In a move condemned by South Africa, France, the UN, and the African Union, generals seized control amid duelling claims of victory in last month’s presidential elections (which excluded the main opposition party). (
Al Jazeera
)
Extra Intrigue
🤣
Your weekly roundup of the world’s lighter news
Police have charged an LA man for stopping a freeway to
record a music video
.
A Singapore-based firm has halted sales of its AI-enhanced teddy bear (?) after it started
giving advice
on where to find knives.
Italian authorities are investigating a man for
dressing up as his late mother
in an attempt to claim her pension.
Air India has
forgotten it owned
a Boeing 737.
And a leading cryptology firm has had to
cancel its own leadership ballot
after losing the encryption key it needs to unlock the results.
Embassy of the day
Nordic House in Yangon (home to the Danish, Finnish, Norwegian, and Swedish missions).
Sometimes diplomacy is about volunteering to rep the ambassador at some random national day, then learning the hard way (standing at the bar) it’s a dry event.
But other times diplomacy is about making cuts
, as in Finland’s new
announcement
that it’s shuttering its embassies in Pakistan, Afghanistan, and Myanmar.
Why?
The Finns mention “
changes in the countries’ political situation and their limited commercial and economic relations
”. And sure, it’s unclear how much Koskenkorva or Harvia you can sell in Taliban-run Afghanistan or junta-run Myanmar.
But the review’s stated aim is also to redirect resources to “
strategically important
” destinations which, as it turns out, means the US energy capital of Houston for now.
Today’s poll
Do you think China will move to take Taiwan militarily in the next five years?
🚢  Yes, tell us why...
⛔ No, tell us why...
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think Ukraine and Russia will accept a peace plan before the end of the year?
🕊️ Yes, there's too much pressure (13%)
🔥
No, they're still too far apart (86%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (1%)
Your two cents:
🔥
G.M:
“Positions are
irreductible
. Russia wants annexation, Ukraine seeks autonomy.”
🕊️
C.O.T.E:
“Ukraine has finally realized it can't win and they will need to make concessions in order to go forward. Likewise, Russia would like to expand its footprint on the world stage, but can't join the big players again without settling the war.”
✍️
G.C:
“Regardless of whether either side accepts a peace plan, Russia will never obey any limits the peace plan puts on it. The war won't really end until either Ukraine doesn't exist or Putin is dead.”