URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/energy-crisis-strengthened-president-maduro
Title: How the energy crisis has strengthened President Maduro

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
We’re coming to town - but unlike Santa Claus, we won’t be drinking milk. If you’re in the Washington, DC area and fancy a casual drink with some of the faces behind your favourite newsletter, come stop by The Admiral in Dupont Circle next Wednesday evening.
More details here!
👈
Today’s briefing is a ~4.7 min read:
🇻🇪
Coming in from the cold?
How the energy crisis has strengthened President Maduro.
➕ Plus:
Vanuatu’s government is still offline, Malaysia’s new Prime Minister hates his Mercedes, and why China is pleased with Taiwan’s local election results.
📰 GLOBAL HEADLINES
Stories:
Premium Times
,
Postimees
,
Liberty Times,
El Universal
,
The Daily Tribune
🤿 DEEP DIVE
Dealing with Maduro: the lesser of a whole bunch of ‘evils’
In brief:
The Biden Administration has given US oil company Chevron the go-ahead to resume production activity in Venezuela.
The global energy shortage is 'persuading' governments to partially lift sanctions on Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro’s regime.
SuperMustache, the Venezuelan superhero that bears a striking resemblance to President Nicolás Maduro, has a hidden passion for diplomatic intrigue.
Drill baby, drill
Over the weekend,
US President Joe Biden lifted a moratorium on sales of Venezuelan oil
and granted the US energy giant Chevron
a six-month license
to resume production and exports.
The decision coincides with ongoing talks between Venezuela’s government and opposition groups who jointly asked the UN last weekend
to release ~$3B in frozen funds for humanitarian use
.
But that’s only half the story,
because
the Biden Administration has been cautiously engaging with Maduro for a while now:
In October, seven US citizens were released i
n exchange for Mrs Maduro’s nephews
.
US envoys have travelled to Caracas twice in recent months.
President Maduro mingled with French President Emmanuel Macron and US climate envoy John Kerry at COP27.
The tides are turning
In just a few months, what’s changed?
1.
🛢️
The energy crisis
Venezuela has the largest proven oil reserves in the world - need we say more? Plus, the US has had little luck negotiating oil production hikes with Saudi Arabia, leading the Biden Administration with few alternatives but to re-engage with Maduro.
2.
🗳️
A new strategy
Domestic and international campaigns to unseat Maduro have gone nowhere, and several Latin American leaders are
already taking steps to reengage
with Venezuela.
Western leaders
might
believe their best remaining option is to convince Maduro to hold freer and fairer elections in the hope he’ll lose at the ballot box.
❝
“For the first time in years, the international community and the Venezuelan opposition agree on the way forward: participation in the next constitutionally mandated presidential elections.”
Guillermo Zubillaga
, senior director of Public Policy Programs and Corporate Relations at the Americas Society/Council of the Americas.
Western leaders faced with a classic strategy problem
Imagine you’re President Biden, and you must choose two of the following three options:
Ban Russian energy
to punish Putin for his invasion of Ukraine.
Ban Venezuelan energy
to punish Maduro for holding fraudulent elections in 2018.
Secure cheap reliable energy
for your country in the near term.
Which two do you choose? President Biden’s decision (
and perhaps yours?
) to let Venezuela come in from the cold has
attracted plenty of criticism
.
But, fortunately for President Biden, the Democratic Party’s
stronger-than-expected
performance in the US midterm elections has given him a little wiggle room on matters of foreign policy.
🏆 The clear winner of all this... is Nicolás Maduro
,
who,
until earlier this year, was
persona non grata
in every Western capital (and plenty of others as well). Given
the great lols Maduro had on his recent trip to Cairo
, he’ll be hoping things stay this way for a while!
🤝 SPONSORED BY THE DAILY UPSIDE
What else we're reading
You’re
probably
definitely subscribed to too many newsletters right now...
but one we can't do without The Daily Upside. Why?
Instead of shouting sensationalist headlines from the hilltops (you know, ‘
10 Year Yield Curve Screams Recession
’), The Daily Upside goes deeper to contextualize the news against the broader business climate.
Their team of scholars, journalists, and investment bankers (with
actual
industry experience) provides a balanced perspective on what’s happening below the surface, comfortably removed from the clickbait noise.
The best part? It’s 100% free to subscribe, and hits your inbox before the markets open. Join me and 750,000 loyal subscribers.
Sign up here.
🔦 REGIONAL SPOTLIGHT
Southeast Asia & the Pacific
🇲🇾 Malaysia
Malaysia’s new Prime Minister, Anwar Ibrahim, is
refusing to use a Mercedes
purchased by his predecessor as his official vehicle.
The move aligns with Anwar’s promises to review state subsidies and cut unnecessary spending.
🇵🇬 Papua New Guinea
Scientists in Papua New Guinea re-encountered a pigeon species that was believed to have
gone extinct in 1882
.
Scientists and conservationists are working with indigenous leaders to ensure the black-naped pheasant pigeon sticks around for the next 140 years and beyond.
🇵🇭 Philippines
The US military will
rebuild a naval outpost
in the Philippines’ Subic Bay 30 years after leaving the South China Sea-adjacent harbour.
The Subic Bay outpost is one of five that the US plans to build in the Philippines to help Manila counter Chinese naval expansion.
🇻🇺 Vanuatu
The government of
Vanuatu has now been offline
for a month, following a cyber attack on 30 October.
Australia has sent an IT team to save the day - in the meantime, government officials are using pads of paper and typewriters to communicate, which is, to three-fifths of us here at Intrigue, literally unthinkable.
🇻🇳 Vietnam
Vingroup, Vietnam’s largest conglomerate, has
started construction
on an electric battery factory with the Chinese firm Gotion High-Tech.
The $254M factory will produce batteries for Vingroup’s electric car company, Vinfast, which plans to start exporting its vehicles this year.
🗞 IN OTHER NEWS...
What Taiwan’s election means for cross-Strait relations
A map showing the electoral results for Taiwan’s local elections. In green (light and dark) the ruling Democratic Progressive party, in blue (light and dark) the Kuomintang party. Credits: Wen-Ti Sung via Twitter.
The news:
Taiwan’s ruling Democratic Progressive Party (DPP) suffered a significant setback in
Saturday’s local elections
, winning only five of the island’s 22 municipalities.
The opposition Kuomintang (KMT) party, which is seen to favour closer ties with China, won 13 municipalities.
Where does that leave China?
Analysts don’t believe that the results signal an interest among the electorate to get too cosy with China.
Voters were primarily concerned with domestic issues, such as the economy and law and order, during this campaign.
If the election had come down to foreign policy
, experts say the DPP would have had the upper hand.
❝
“All the polling data we have points to the picture that the KMT is far less popular than the DPP, and their positions towards China are far less popular than the DPP’s. They just have a lot more popular local politicians in office right now.”
Political analyst Nathan Batto, speaking to the
Financial Times
last weekend.
Some analysts even think the results could help ease tensions,
especially after such a dramatic summer:
❝
“Narratively, China can use the election result to justify to domestic audience more 'strategic patience' towards Taiwan, arguing that more Beijing-friendlier forces in [Taiwan] are winning.”
Political scientist
Wen-Ti Sung
Waiting for 2024:
The DPP’s poor performance led Taiwanese President Tsai Ing-Wen to resign as party leader (she was term-limited in 2024, anyway).
In the meantime,
the opposition party KMT may have found its star candidate to win back the Presidency
- Chiang Wan-an, the great-grandson of Taiwan’s militant founder, Chiang Kai-shek, became the
youngest person ever elected mayor of Taipei
.
💌 ASK A DIPLOMAT
We were off last week for Thanksgiving, so didn't get a chance to solicit questions from you!
Got a burning geopolitical question?
Have something you've always wanted to know about how diplomacy works?
Consider us your personal Siri, only less annoying!
Drop your questions here!
Do you like this ask a diplomat section?
(If not, what would you prefer?)
❌ No
✅ Yes
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate