URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/ice-goes-international
Title: 🌍 ICE goes international

Today’s briefing:
— ICE goes international
— Malaysia’s football committee resigns
— When world leaders do comedy
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Sometimes diplomacy involves navigating historic dilemmas, like how to respond to a war. Other times the dilemmas are like if your minister is on a niche health regime and asks for a bespoke protein shake as he’s entering a big meeting, should you also prepare a protein shake for the other country’s minister?
The answer is yes, but then don’t be surprised if that other minister then takes a sip and winces with the universal ‘wtf’ face, or if your own minister later interrupts proceedings to ask “
were you going to finish that
” before chugging the untouched protein shake.
Could this true-ish story help us understand today’s briefing? Absolutely not.
Number of the day
2 million
That’s roughly how many casualties the Russo-Ukraine war has left to date, according to the Center for Strategic and International Studies. By some estimates, Moscow is now losing as many troops in a month as the Soviets lost during
a decade
in Afghanistan.
The world watches
For a team of ex-diplomats normally more focused on events beyond the US border, US Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) actions started as more of a domestic story.
Sure, immigration enforcement is inherently international: those with big undocumented diasporas (Mexico, Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador) have long been issuing
sharper citizen advisories
urging their nationals to carry ID, avoid key sites, and know their rights.
And others (like
China
) started warning their nationals after fatal ICE shootings.
But now, a year into Trump 2.0’s tougher immigration stance, this story is clearly global.
Here are
four examples
:
“I have been harder than anyone else in Italy on [the ICE raids] … but it’s not like the SS are coming” -
Antonio Tajani, Italy’s foreign minister
That’s the foreign minister of a NATO ally and G7 member weighing in on ICE.
Why?
First
, footage emerged of ICE agents in Minneapolis threatening to smash the windows of a vehicle containing a crew for Italian public broadcaster RAI, and threatening to drag the journalists out. Italy’s foreign ministry wants answers.
Then
second
, Italian journalists started asking if ICE agents will be in Milan for the upcoming Winter Olympics, and an Italian official’s confirmation triggered a mix of panic and confusion until the local US ambassador
clarified
that the particular ICE unit “
will be strictly advisory and intelligence-based, with no patrolling or enforcement involvement.
”
But the damage was already done, escalating to
a city-federal spat
in Italy: Milan’s centre-left mayor labelled ICE a “
militia that kills
” and declared it unwelcome in Milan, prompting more
statements
from centre-right Rome reframing the ICE role as routine.
Meanwhile, a citizen petition to block ICE has amassed tens of thousands of signatures overnight, with Mayor Sala putting it like this: “
Can’t we just say no to Trump for once?
”
Now follow us back in time with…
“This issue could have a considerable impact on foreign direct investment in the US” -
Lee Jae-Myung, president of South Korea
That’s another US ally and G20 member after ICE detained ~400 Korean nationals at a raid on Hyundai’s vaunted battery plant in Georgia a few months ago. It was an early hint at how one aim (tougher immigration) can quickly complicate another (stronger economy).
Why?
Wall Street always assumed a tougher immigration stance would mostly hit sectors like agriculture, construction, and hospitality, not just because of deportations, but because
fear
of deportation would spike absenteeism. And that’s already in the data:
Individual farms have reported record crop spoilage amid labour shortfalls
The construction sector says it needs another 350k workers to meet demand, and
The leisure & hospitality sector now has something like a million vacancies.
Meanwhile, parts of
the broligarchy
are now voicing unease too, presumably given how much Silicon Valley relies on talented migrants, whether they’re founding 55% of all unicorns, doing 74% of all Bay Area computer/math jobs, or running a third of the top 100 US tech firms. Tech employees don’t seem comforted by the fact these ICE actions are mostly targeting lower-skilled, undocumented workers.
And it’s not just US companies feeling the heat…
“I urge Capgemini to shed light, in an extremely transparent manner, on its activities” -
Roland Lescure, France’s industry minister
Leaks have now revealed that French tech giant Capgemini has helped ICE agents locate targets for raids, triggering an online backlash plus even calls for an EU blacklisting (it’s one of the bloc’s largest tech services providers).
And of course, an Intrigue story is not complete without angry diplomats, so…
“Acts of this nature must not be repeated in Ecuador’s consular offices in the United States” -
Ecuador’s foreign ministry
After a video went viral showing ICE agents trying to enter Ecuador’s consulate in Minneapolis, Quito (run by the Trump-friendly Daniel Noboa)
got angry
.
In the
video
, a consulate staffer tells the agent,
“this is the consulate of Ecuador, you are not allowed to enter”,
prompting
the answer,
“I didn’t enter… if you touch me, I will grab you.”
There might now be a dash of schadenfreude in Mexico, given it was Ecuadorian officers who themselves
breached
Mexico’s
embassy
to haul Ecuador’s ex-veep to jail in 2024.
Anyway, you can bet these ICE headlines will keep rippling elsewhere, partly for reasons evident on ICE’s own website: with offices all around the world, it’s using the motto,
“Crime does not stop at our borders, and neither do we.”
Intrigue’s Take
The international order rests on state sovereignty, which in turn rests on states managing their own borders and enforcing their own laws, and President Trump swept back to power pledging tougher enforcement of immigration laws — unlawful border crossings are down ~95%.
But what we’re now witnessing illustrates something else:
First
, polling suggests initial support for the concept has now given way to dismay over implementation, which leads us to…
Second
, you could argue that’s a pattern for Trump, who’s turned (say) let’s secure the Arctic to let’s threaten Greenland.
Third
, slogans are catchy, but policy is messy, particularly in such a human-centric area like migration.
Fourth
, soft power is tough to build, but easy to lose — more a lease than an asset. One year Taylor Swift has Milan fans camping out for days, and the next you’ve got Italy’s foreign minister having to clarify you’re not actually the SS.
Finally
, our hyper-connected world now means any ‘domestic’ illusion is dead, with over-reach in Minneapolis quickly becoming outrage in Rome or Quito.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇮🇷
IRAN
-
Speculation swirls.
Tensions remain high in Iran after President Trump warned that the “
massive armada
” deployed to the region is “
ready, willing, and able to rapidly fulfill its mission, with speed and violence, if necessary
”. (
Politico
)
Comment
: Trump says he wants Iran to agree another nuclear deal, though there are also rumours the rhetoric could be aimed at inspiring renewed protests (this time with more US forces pre-positioned).
🇩🇪
GERMANY
-
Bank raid.
German police have raided the head offices of Deutsche Bank, Germany’s largest bank, in connection with a(nother) money laundering investigation. (
DW
)
Comment
: This is hardly Deutsche Bank’s first rodeo, though this raid is extra-intriguing when you consider it’s a day before its annual results drop, and local outlets are drawing links to Russian billionaire (and former Chelsea owner) Roman Abramovich.
🇰🇷
SOUTH KOREA
-
First lady jailed.
A court has sentenced former first lady Kim Keon Hee (2022-25) to 20 months in jail after finding her guilty of accepting luxury gifts from the controversial Unification Church in exchange for political favours. A ruling in her husband’s insurrection case is expected next month (he just copped five years for related charges). (
Korea Times
)
Comment
: If the Unification Church rings a bell, you’re not wrong. Shinzo Abe’s killer identified the Japanese ex-PM’s links to the organisation as his motive.
🇦🇺
AUSTRALIA
-
That’s mine.
China’s ambassador to Australia has flagged China will take unspecified measures if Australia commits to a forced sale of Darwin Port, which local authorities leased to a China-based company for 99 years in 2015. (
SCMP
)
Comment:
With PM Albanese campaigning on retaking the port, this issue is shaping up as a challenge for the China ties he managed to stabilise after first taking power.
🇪🇸
SPAIN
-
Welcome here.
Spain’s shockingly handsome prime minister has announced plans to legalise roughly 500,000 undocumented migrants by decree, bucking a regional trend. Sanchez argues it’s both humane, and good for Spain’s economy (which is grappling with an ageing population). The conservative opposition is warning it’ll overwhelm public services and encourage more unlawful immigration. (
EuroNews
)
🇲🇽
MEXICO
-
No more oil.
Days after insisting Mexico’s oil supplies to Cuba will continue (partly for humanitarian reasons), President Sheinbaum has now confirmed Mexico is actually halting the oil shipments, though she’s denying it’s due to US pressure. (
AP
)
Comment
: It’s hard to see how US pressure wasn’t involved, even if indirectly by eroding Cuba’s ability to pay. With Venezuela’s cheap oil shipments now over, and Mexico cutting its own spigot, Cuba’s energy crisis looks set to somehow get worse
, with the WSJ reporting the US is actively seeking regime change by year-end.
🇸🇸
SOUTH SUDAN
-
Renewed violence.
The UN is warning of mass violence after South Sudan announced a “
spare no-one
” offensive to reconquer territory in the central state of Jonglei from opposition militias, who in turn claim they’ll reach the capital of Juba by the end of February. This is starting to look a lot like a return to full civil war. (
BBC
)
Extra Intrigue
In other worlds…
Tech:
Amazon has announced it’s
laying off 16,000 employees
in its latest round of staff cuts.
Science:
A US virologist and amateur brewer has created a
vaccine in beer form
(cheers to innovation).
Sports:
The entire Malaysian football executive committee has resigned over a scandal involving
forged documents for foreign players
to play in the Asia Cup.
Back and forth of the day
Unless you’ve been living under a rock (is there space for us too actually?) you’ll have seen memes about France’s Emmanuel Macron having to rock blue aviators at Davos. He says it was doctor’s orders for him to go full Bono after a burst blood vessel, and honestly if we had to get sick, we’d also choose the condition that medically
requires
you to wear shades like you’re Tom Selleck solving crimes in 1980s Hawaii.
Anyway, all that throat-clearing by way of context for why the UK’s Keir Starmer just got laughs by donning a pair of aviators at a comedy show then greeting the crowd with a “
bonjour
”. And Macron, never one to be upstaged, responded on TikTok within minutes with his other Davos viral moment: “
for sure
”.
Today’s poll
What do you think are the main international implications from recent ICE headlines?
✅ Nothing, they're just headlines
😶 A temporary hit to US standing
❌ This is a big deal
✍️ Other (write us!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
How do you feel about a weaker USD?
👍 Good, tell us why... (44%)
👎
Bad, tell us why.... (52%)
✍️ Other (write in!)  (4%)
Your two cents:
👎
A:
“Simply put, because it is one tangible result of losing global confidence in our economy.”
👍
M.R:
“No chance to restore manufacturing or reduce trade imbalance with strong DXY.”
👎
I.S:
“Because I don’t live in America, but have a lot of money (for me that is) invested there, as a hedge against my own currency, which has appreciated 1,841% against the dollar in the three years since I invested the money!”