URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/impasse-capitol-hill-throws-us-support-ukraine-doubt
Title: 🌍 Impasse on Capitol Hill throws US support for Ukraine into doubt

Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
We’ve already had eight key elections this year, and Pakistanis are currently voting right now as this is hitting your inbox
.
But one election looms larger than all the rest, and its influence is already being felt far from US shores. Today’s briefing unpicks the
US Senate’s rejection of military aid to Ukraine
yesterday and the effect it might have on the battlefield.
When ‘consuming’ US politics, I find a dash of humour helps the medicine go down, which is why I’m reminded of the late Senator John McCain’s observation that, in the US Senate, "
it's always darkest before it goes totally black
”.
Hey, black humour is still humour.
- John Fowler, Co-Founder
Was this forwarded to you? We're a team of ex-diplomats producing a concise and engaging geopolitical briefing for 85k+ leaders each day.
It’s free to subscribe
.
TODAY’S NEWS
Pakistan votes.
Voting is now underway in Pakistan with few doubts about who’ll emerge on top (three-time former PM, Nawaz Sharif). Authorities have suspended mobile phone services across the country for election day, citing a “
recent surge in terrorist incidents
”.
Israel rejects Hamas deal.
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu called the proposal, which included the release of hostages in exchange for a four-and-a-half-month truce and a plan to permanently halt hostilities, “
delusional
”. US Secretary of State Antony Blinken, who’s in the region seeking a breakthrough, is confident there’s still “
space to continue to pursue an agreement
”. Meanwhile, Netanyahu ordered his troops to prepare to expand their operation to Gaza’s southernmost city of
Rafah
, where a million Palestinians have taken refuge.
US kills Iran-backed group leader in strike.
A US drone strike killed a senior commander of Kataib Hezbollah in Baghdad yesterday. The US believes he was responsible for the attack that killed three US troops in Jordan last month.
White House leaves top Asia job unfilled.
The Biden administration has opted not to replace its top Asia official in the White House, Kurt Campbell, after he was confirmed on Tuesday as deputy secretary of state. The decision to leave his White House role vacant has reportedly caused concern among some US allies seeking more US presence in the region to counter China.
Azerbaijan leader cruises to re-election.
Azerbaijani President Ilham Aliyev has won a fifth term in office with 92% of the vote. The result is no surprise given his control over the media, an opposition boycott, and his success in capturing the contested region of Nagorno-Karabakh (where he cast his vote) from Armenia last year.
World breaches new 1.5°C threshold.
Global temperature rises breached the world’s 1.5°C limit for an entire year in 2023 for the first time ever, according to the EU’s climate service. World leaders set the 1.5°C goal in 2015.
TOP STORY
Impasse on Capitol Hill throws US support for Ukraine into doubt
Image credits: AP, NBC News, Getty Images.
The US Senate yesterday rejected
sprawling legislation that would have sent military aid to Ukraine, Israel, and Taiwan. The senators who voted against the bill largely did so for
domestic political reasons.
Many lawmakers say they still want to send the aid, and Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer has indicated he’ll introduce a
more streamlined bill worth $95B
that would include:
$60B in military aid for
Ukraine
$14.1B in security assistance for
Israel
$9.15B for
humanitarian purposes
$2.44B to support US military operations in the
Red Sea
, and
$4.83B for
US allies in the Pacific
"
to deter aggression by the Chinese government
".
Punchbowl News reported
yesterday that
a ‘clean’ foreign aid bill might get enough support to pass the Senate
, and there’s also a potential path forward in the House of Representatives.
That sounds like a whole lot of equivocating, but in a presidential election year, that’s about as much certainty as we’re likely to get.
Meanwhile, Europe says it will step up its support for Ukraine
Last year, the EU promised to send one million shells to Ukraine by March 2024. As of late 2023, it had provided only ~330,000.
The EU is expected to deliver only about half of the originally promised shells
by next month’s deadline.
EU foreign policy chief Josep Borrell blamed the EU's slow deliveries on supply chain problems and an overall lack of investment in defence manufacturing due to complacency during the relatively peaceful post-Cold War years.
Nevertheless,
Borrell yesterday
committed the
EU to giving Ukraine 1,155,000 artillery shells by the end of 2024.
The EU also agreed last week to send Ukraine $54B of budgetary help (which is separate from military aid).
What does all this mean for Ukraine?
The New York Times reported
that the Ukrainian army is now
“critically short of ammunition”
as “
mortar crews are forced to ration artillery shells
” as they are “
almost exclusively engaged in defensive operations
”.
While the war remains a stalemate, Russia is doing most of the attacking.
Further afield
, a
video released Monday
shows Ukrainian special forces fighting Russia-aligned mercenaries in the Sudanese civil war. The troops’ presence so far from home is likely part of Ukraine’s strategy of using relatively ‘cheap’ special operations to score propaganda victories and demonstrate that its forces can hit Russia anytime, anywhere.
Back in Kyiv
, a bill to draft as many as 500,000 troops is under debate in the Ukrainian Parliament and
President Zelensky is said to be considering a major shake-up
of government officials.
There’s also speculation that the Ukrainian Ambassador to the US, Oksana Markarova, will be elevated to a senior position in Kyiv thanks to her close ties with the Biden administration.
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
Seen in the cold light of geopolitical day, sending military support to Ukraine has helped the West stress test its war machine.
For example,
most of the $60B in Schumer’s proposed bill won’t leave the US
- it’ll go to the Pentagon to buy brand new weapons from US defence manufacturers to refill the older stock that has been sent to Ukraine.
And one imagines European defence strategists are thankful that their military manufacturing and supply chain issues have come to light now in Eastern Ukraine rather than later and much closer to home.
Of course, none of that is any comfort to Ukraine as it stares down the barrel of Russia’s invasion entering its third year.
Also worth noting:
The Speaker of the Israeli Knesset, Amir Ohana, is in D.C. taking meetings on Capitol Hill this week. The Israeli Embassy will no doubt be furnishing him with talking points to persuade US lawmakers to pass the military aid bill.
EU foreign policy chief Josep Borrell took refuge in a bomb shelter in Kyiv on Wednesday morning as
Russian drone and missile strikes
killed five and injured at least 50.
SUPPORTED BY WANDER
Book the perfect Wander with inspiring views, modern workstations, restful beds, hotel-grade cleaning and 24/7 concierge service.
Wander is the future of travel: the guarantees of a quality hotel paired with the comforts (and space) of a home. We own 100% of the rentals on our platform meaning we deliver high quality, smart technology and inspiring locations with every guest.
It’s a vacation home, but better.
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇵🇰
Pakistan
: Two
bombs targeting political offices
killed over 25 people in Pakistan on the eve of the country’s general election yesterday. No group has yet claimed responsibility for the attacks.
🇷🇺
Russia
: Controversial former Fox News host Tucker Carlson has travelled to Russia to
sit down with Russian President Vladimir Putin
in an interview due to air as soon as today (Thursday). It’s the first interview the Russian president has given Western media since the beginning of the war.
🇹🇭
Thailand
: The Thai government and Muslim separatists have
held a first round of peace talks
in Malaysia and agreed to a roadmap to end a decades-long insurgency in southern Thailand. Almost 7,000 people have died since 2004, but negotiations made little headway until recently.
🇬🇹
Guatemala
: Guatemala, a traditional partner of Taiwan, is considering reaching out to establish
formal trade ties with China
, according to the Central American country’s new foreign minister. But Guatemala also wants to maintain formal diplomatic ties with Taiwan, an idea Beijing would presumably reject.
🇹🇷
Turkey
: Turkish defence company Baykar has begun building a
drone-producing plant in Ukraine
. The weapons manufacturer, which has become a key supplier to the Ukrainian army, expects the plant to produce around 120 drones annually.
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Here’s what people around the world googled yesterday
🇯🇵
Users in
Japan
looked up ‘ブルースカイ’ (
BlueSky
) after the X/Twitter rival social media service
opened sign-ups
to the broader public.
🇮🇳
Accounting students in
India
googled
‘ICAI’
to check their
test results
with the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India.
🇩🇰
And
Danes
searched for the latest at
‘Ørsted’
after the Danish offshore wind company announced it was
slashing renewable targets
and cutting 800 jobs.
PASSPORT OF THE DAY
Credits: Wikipedia.
Given many of you loved our previous fake passport segment, we’re back with another one!
Russian revolutionary Vladimir Lenin used a counterfeit ID card
to escape to Finland in 1917 to evade a warrant for his arrest issued a few months prior by the provisional government.
In the forged documents, Lenin is identified as Konstantin Petrovich Ivanov, a worker of the Sestroretsk Armory. You’ll note that Lenin is without his iconic moustache and goatee and appears to be wearing a wig. Are Intriguers for or against the more clean-cut revolutionary look?
DAILY POLL
Do you think Europe will fill the gap if Washington fails to send more military aid to Ukraine?
💰 Yes, European countries will have no choice but to step up
👎 No, they're already scraping the bottom of the barrel
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Which of the following sectors would cause the most chaos if it went on strike?
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️
🌾
Agriculture  (13%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🚚
Transport (27%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️
🚽
Sanitation (14%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️ ☎️ Telecomms  (18%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
👷
Construction  (1%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 🎖️ Security  (5%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
💸
Finance  (8%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
📖
Education (1%)
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🏥
Health (11%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!)  (2%)
Your two cents:
🚚
M:
“In a digital world people forget about the importance of transport. Food doesn't arrive in megacities by wi-fi.”
🚽
S.H:
“A long enough strike of sanitation workers would bring the streets of cities back to the middle ages.”
🏥
K.S.R:
“The global pandemic gave us the answer to this. We know we can survive with everything near grinding to a halt…except the health services.”
☎️
C.Y:
“Any of these industries on a mass strike would be chaos, but if we couldn't get in touch with each other to discuss it, I can't even begin to imagine...”
✍️
T.J.W:
“Energy sector … natural gas, LPG, gasoline, diesel, electricity production and distribution. Without power, the wheels of everyday living and business stop.”
Share the Intrigue