URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/indias-expanding-navy
Title: 🌍 India's expanding navy

Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Legendary US investor Charlie Munger passed away yesterday at 99. Reading the obituaries on his remarkable life, it all brought to mind an example of how mistakes can shape history:
In 1888, a French paper accidentally published an (unflattering) obituary on arms dealer
Alfred Nobel
when he was still alive, apparently inspiring the guy to leave his vast fortune to establish the Nobel Prizes.
Another?
Egypt
’s then president (Sadat)
reportedly
took advice from a mystic when making his historic 1977 visit to Israel. The specific prophecies proved wrong, but his visit still paved the way for a peace deal a year later.
Maybe I’m pre-emptively excusing any typos you might find in today’s briefing below (featuring
India’s naval expansion
, by the way). But honestly, mistakes can be okay. Charlie Munger said as much himself.
- Jeremy Dicker, Managing Editor
Not a subscriber? Join here!
TODAY’S NEWS
Biden pivots?
President Biden
tweeted
yesterday that “t
o continue down the path of terror, violence, killing, and war is to give Hamas what they seek.
” White House officials reportedly said later that this wasn’t a change in policy. But his words seem designed to pressure Israeli leader Benjamin Netanyahu not to resume full ground operations in Gaza when the Hamas truce expires tonight, given the extent of civilian casualties and the humanitarian crisis in the strip.
Suspect poisoning.
Ukraine claims the wife of its military intelligence chief has been poisoned with heavy metals not found in “
ordinary civilian or military life
”. At this point, it’s fair to say the list of suspects isn’t very long.
US aircraft crash.
A US military aircraft has crashed in waters off Japan killing at least one, with search and rescue operations currently underway for the seven others on board. The incident appears to involve an Osprey (a sort of helicopter-plane hybrid), which has been at the centre of several crashes in recent years.
Haley wins key endorsement.
Republican presidential hopeful Nikky Haley has received the support of a key super political action committee (PAC) backed by billionaire Charles Koch. Haley (a former US ambassador to the UN) is hoping to pass Florida governor Ron DeSantis and go head to head with clear Republican frontrunner Donald Trump in the 2024 primary race.
A Saudi Expo.
Riyadh has won the hosting rights for the 2030 World Expo, beating rival bids from Rome and the South Korean port city of Busan. It’ll be the second World Expo ever hosted in the Middle East (after Expo 2020 Dubai).
TOP STORY
India prepares to build a third aircraft carrier
India is set to add a third aircraft carrier worth $5B to its fleet, with its Defense Acquisition Council likely to clear the deal on Friday, according to
Bloomberg
.
With a refurbed Russian carrier already in service, this rumoured addition would be India’s second
made-in-India
carrier. It’s all part of India’s aim of getting a
175-ship force
(up from ~130 ships now) in the water by 2035.
There’s
a mix of internal and external factors
at play here:
Some of Prime Minister Modi’s
key
domestic drivers
include a push to:
Turn India into a
global defence industry hub
Generate related jobs, tech, and investment, and
Tap the country’s nationalist sentiment (Modi
rocked a G-suit
for a ride in one of India’s homemade fighter jets this past weekend).
Some of Modi’s
key
external
drivers
include a push to:
Play catch-up with China, which has the world’s largest navy
Reduce his reliance on others (like Russia) for military kit, and
Thereby expand his room to manoeuvre as a global player.
But why aircraft carriers specifically?
Due to new tech like anti-ship ballistic missiles, there’s been debate on whether carriers are now just high-cost sitting ducks. But while vulnerabilities will shape how carriers are used, they’re still key: they enable countries to join (or threaten to join) a fight almost anywhere, not just within refuelling distance from home.
This kind of imposing presence is what the boffins call ‘power projection’. And it’s why India, the US, China, Russia, France, and others are still building carriers.
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
Let’s run some quick numbers here.
India is now one of only ~seven countries that can build a carrier. And it’s now got the same number of carriers as China. Sounds good, right?
But China’s third carrier is already in testing, while India’s won’t be ready until the 2030s (by which point its oldest will likely be retired)
China already has the world’s largest navy (
370 ships and subs
, ~90 more than the US), and
China’s navy is growing more quickly on the back of a production capacity that’s
reportedly
now
200 times
that of the US.
So this proposed new aircraft carrier is a big deal for India. But on balance, naval momentum in the region still looks to be heading the other way.
Also worth noting:
Based on
tonnage
, the US Navy (with 11 carriers) is still double the size of China’s. The US continues to retain certain tech edges also.
But one
historical study
suggests the number (not quality) of vessels is the most important factor in determining a naval victory.
India
says
up to 70 different navies sail in the Indian Ocean. It wants three carriers to ensure it has at least one off each of its two main coasts maintaining a continuous presence in the Indian Ocean.
Share the Intrigue
FINANCIAL TIPS FROM FINANCE BUZZ
6 things to help financially
…
These
small (but smart) moves
can help you supplement your income and earn legit cash – without doing much extra “work”!
Experts urge Americans to transfer their balances by 2024
…
Some credit cards can actually help you get out of debt. By getting a new 0% intro APR credit card, no interest means you could pay off your debt faster.
See the full list of cards here
.
Amazon hates when you do these 8 things (but they can't stop you)
…
Here are
8 secret hacks
that you need to know if you're an Amazon shopper. They can help you save money, cancel unwanted subscriptions, and
earn legit cash
.
Start your journey today.
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇦🇿
Azerbaijan
: The US embassy in Baku
cancelled an event
featuring US-educated Azerbaijanis after a pro-government outlet suggested the students were American spies. Relations between the countries have deteriorated since Azerbaijan seized Nagorno-Karabakh in September.
🇲🇰
North Macedonia
: The Baltic nations - Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania - say they’ll
skip an upcoming security summit
in North Macedonia if Russia’s foreign minister Sergey Lavrov is allowed to attend. Lavrov has only visited two other NATO countries - Turkey and the US (for the UN General Assembly) - since Russia invaded Ukraine.
🇵🇭
Philippines:
Norwegian mediators announced Tuesday that the Filipino government will
resume peace talks
with communist rebels. The conflict between the two sides started in 1969 and has resulted in the deaths of tens of thousands of combatants and civilians.
🇵🇪
Peru
: The country’s top prosecutor has
blamed Peru’s president
, Dina Boluarte, for the deaths of dozens of protestors over the past year. Boluarte rejects the accusation as “
despicable
” and accuses the prosecutor of seeking to distract from her own legal woes (including allegations of corruption).
🇸🇱
Sierra Leone:
The
information minister says the attacks by armed men on military outposts and prisons over the weekend represented a
failed coup attempt
. The entire country has been under curfew since the attacks, which allowed 2,000 inmates to escape prison.
EXTRA INTRIGUE
What we’re reading about initial public offerings (IPOs)
Shein files for U.S. IPO as fast-fashion giant looks to expand its global reach
Reddit might once again be flirting with an IPO
Huel* plays down London listing as IPO market stutters
From Zero To IPO: Lessons Learned From The World’s Most Successful Startups
IPO Stories: ESG, from private to public
*Huel is a UK-based meal replacements company
PHOTO OF THE DAY
Fuelling before take-off at London Heathrow. Source: Virgin Atlantic
Aviation history is full of firsts. You’ve got the first flight (Wright brothers); the first
solo transatlantic
flight (Lindbergh); the
first FBI agent forced to take control of a flight filled with venomous snakes
(Samuel L Jackson); and now, the first
sustainable-fuel-powered transatlantic
flight (
Virgin Atlantic
).
Fuelled with processed waste and cooking oils, the jet flew from London to New York yesterday (Tuesday). These fuels can emit 70% less than traditional fuels, but they’re still too costly to support widespread adoption at this stage.
DAILY POLL
Which do you think is the most important asset for a navy?
🛬 Aircraft carriers
🚢 Cruisers / battleships
🐟 Submarines
💣 Minehunters
🏝️ Amphibious ships
🦾 Underwater drones
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think a high debt burden is inherently bad?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
💸
Yes, the chicken must come home to roost sooner or later (78%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
📈
No, as long as an economy is healthy it's fine (20%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!)  (2%)
Your two cents:
📈
S.B:
“Quite literally modern capitalism for most countries is founded on debt based growth, in which all is okay as long as growth is achieved.”
✍️
A.A:
“Depends on the clout of the economy. China and the US can get away with things Sri Lanka could never dream of.”
💸
W.G:
“Spiralling interest costs on ever higher debt burdens soak-up funds that could otherwise be invested in growth and social programs. Additionally, high interest obligations inevitably fuel inflation that is an underlying factor in currency devaluation. See Argentina et al.”
Share the newsletter