URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/india-denies-claims-threatened-shut-twitter
Title: 🌍 India denies claims it threatened to shut down Twitter

Today’s newsletter supported by:
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
The world’s most googled query in the last 12 months was ‘Google’, followed by ‘YouTube’ and ‘weather’. So don’t feel too bad about searching ‘can I eat watermelon seeds’.
Today’s briefing is a 4 min read:
🇮🇳
India
denies claims it threatened to shut down Twitter.
🇳🇬
Nigeria’s
fuel subsidy is ending.
➕
Plus:
An epic bridge in West Africa, how the papers are covering the Arab-China Business Conference, and why folks in Finland are googling ‘Iltalehti’.
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇦🇿
Azerbaijan
: Azerbaijan will
purchase an Italian military aircraft
in one of its first arms deals with a Western country. Italy linked the transaction to closer energy ties between Rome and Baku.
🇷🇴
Romania
: The Romanian ambassador to Kenya
has been recalled
after allegedly comparing African diplomats to monkeys during a meeting. The African Group within the UN pledged never to work with the ambassador following his remarks.
🇻🇳
Vietnam
: Several people were killed and 16 arrested after a
deadly shooting at two police stations
in central Vietnam. There’s long-standing discontent in the area regarding issues like land rights and autonomy from Hanoi.
🇭🇳
Honduras
: Honduras
opened an embassy in China
on Sunday, months after severing ties with Taipei and switching recognition to Beijing. President Xi Jinping says he’s open to discussing a free trade agreement with the Central American country.
🇸🇾
Syria
: Canada and the Netherlands are taking Syria’s President
Bashar al-Assad and his regime to the International Criminal Court
over allegations of torture and other human rights violations. Previous efforts to investigate the Syrian regime through UN channels were vetoed by Russia.
🇮🇳
India | Tech
Regulations: trap or protection?
India denies Twitter censorship allegations
Jack Dorsey, Twitter’s co-founder and former CEO, has
accused
India of pressuring Twitter to take down content relating to India’s mass 2020/21 farmer protests. But India
denies
the claims, calling them an “
outright lie
”.
This isn’t the first time Delhi has addressed these kinds of accusations
. Earlier this year, tax officials raided the BBC’s India offices shortly after the release of a BBC documentary critical of Narendra Modi.
Critics say India is seeking
to stifle free speech
. But India
says
Twitter “
behaved as if the laws of India did not apply to it
”; it argues online regulation is necessary to defend society against threats like misinformation.
And major markets like India have plenty of leverage over tech giants
:
📈
900 million
Indians are now online (up from 398 million in 2018)
💻 Around
315 million
of those are already on Facebook, and
🐦 15 million are on Twitter (India is Twitter’s 5th largest market)
Intrigue's take:
These days, regulators are looking at big tech more intently than a wedding-planner with Ed Sheeran’s back catalogue. And there are principles at play:
People have a right to free expression
Companies need to comply with the law, and
Lawmakers need to tackle online crime and protect the vulnerable
But there’s
tension
at play here, too: tension between each principle; between those principles and profits; and between big tech and local law. And that’s all driving real debate in boardrooms and capitals everywhere.
Also worth
noting
:
Between 2020 and 2023, India fell 19 places on the
World Press Freedom Index
to 161 out of 180 countries.
During his
interview
, Jack Dorsey also accused Nigeria and Turkey of similar behaviour.
📰
How newspapers covered…
This year’s Arab-China Business Conference.
New York, US
Saudi Arabia and China Flaunt Growing Ties at Investment Forum
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
First day of Arab-China conference sees signing of 30 deals worth $10 billion
Beijing, China
China-Arab cooperation deepens at key biz conference, in clear rejection of US’ zero-sum game
Today’s newsletter is supported by:
The Progress Network
Tired of doomscrolling?
There's a lot going right in the world, but you wouldn't know it from the news. Check out The Progress Network’s free weekly newsletter, What Could Go Right?, for some balance.
It covers the work being done to solve the world’s most complex issues and shares constructive ideas for a better future.
When you sign up, you’ll also get their free reading and listening guide on the progress humanity has made in just the past few decades.
Try a different approach to the news and sign up now!
🇳🇬
Nigeria | Geo-economics
President Bola Tinubu (L) is ending a popular fuel subsidy in Nigeria
The end of a popular fuel subsidy in Nigeria
Newly-inaugurated President Bola Tinubu
acknowledged
on Monday (12 June) his decision to eliminate Nigeria’s long-standing fuel subsidy from 1 July will
“impose an extra burden on the masses of our people”
.
The subsidy is popular among voters, and loathed by policymakers
:
millions of Nigerians have come to depend on it to make ends meet
yet it costs ~$10B each year and has long encountered corruption
The last time a president tried to end the subsidy in 2012, he backtracked after a 120% price increase triggered weeks of deadly protests.
Intrigue’s take
:
Tinubu didn’t have a lot of options here: Nigeria was going deeper into debt to pay for the fuel subsidy each year. But he’s promising the long-term gains will outweigh the short-term pain for Nigerians, who are already living through 20%+ inflation:
Tinubu says the savings will be re-invested in infrastructure, education and healthcare, and
A
new mega-refinery
has potential to cut fuel costs in parallel
Also worth noting:
Nigeria is Africa’s second largest oil producer. Fuel prices there have nearly tripled since Tinubu announced the policy on 29 May.
Ratings agencies
Fitch
and
Moody’s
both say removing the subsidy will improve Nigeria’s outlook.
🎧 Today on
Intrigue Outloud
Credits: Associated Press
What could former First Minister Nicola Sturgeon’s arrest mean for the Scottish independence movement?
Find out here!
➕
Extra Intrigue
Here’s what people around the world Googled over the past 12 months:
The most searched query in
🇫🇮
Finland
was ‘
Iltalehti’
, the name of a popular Finnish tabloid.
The top search topic in
🇨🇳
China
(where Google is restricted) was ‘
翻译’ (translate)
.
Google searches for ‘
ChatGPT’
in
🇨🇼
Curaçao
grew by 4100% over the last 12 months, the biggest increase in all query terms.
🗳️ Poll time!
Are tech regulations a trap or a necessary protection?
🧨 Trap
🛡️ Protection
🤲 Both
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
🗺️ Map of the day
The Senegambia Bridge connects southern and northern Senegal across The Gambia. Credits: Encyclopaedia Britannica and BBC.
Ever wonder what’s with The Gambia being surrounded on three sides by Senegal?
They were once united as the Senegambia Confederation from 1982, until disagreements led them back to independence in 1989. But cooperation continues: in 2019, The Gambia and Senegal agreed to connect the disparate parts of their territories with a bridge named Senegambia.
Yesterday’s poll:
What's the best geopolitics-related movie you've seen?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
The Constant Gardener (2005) (22%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️ The Lives of Others (2006) (12%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️ Charlie Wilson's War (2007) (14%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️ Argo (2012) (17%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ No (2012) (5%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ The Whistleblower (2010) (2%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️ Bridge of Spies (2015) (12%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ Z (1969) (3%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ Syriana (2005) (7%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!) (6%)
Your two cents
:
✍️
S.M:
“
Official Secrets
- UK film about whistleblowing during the UK/US decision to invade Iraq and the speculated presence of WMDs.”
✍️
L.L:
“All of them. Here are 3 other top favorites of mine:
Lord of War
(2005);
The Interpreter
(2005); and
The Laundromat
(2019).”