URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/indonesia-get-first-highspeed-train
Title: 🌍 Indonesia get its first high-speed train

Today’s newsletter supported by:
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Most bad ideas don’t make it off the whiteboard. But every now and then you get a
martini spy glass
, featuring a mic and antenna disguised as an olive and toothpick. Sounds cool, right? Except it short-circuits when you pour in the martini.
Today’s briefing is a 4 min read:
🚄
Indonesia
gets its first bullet train, courtesy of
China
.
🇲🇿
How a Swiss bank broke
Mozambique’s
economy.
➕
Plus:
This year’s Nobel winners, how the papers are covering EU foreign ministers meeting in Kyiv, and why folks in the Kingdom of Eswatini are tweeting about elections.
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇨🇳
China
: A top Chinese scientist insists India’s historic Moon probe
didn’t land near the south pole
as claimed. China is planning its own unmanned space mission to the Moon’s south pole next year.
🇪🇺
EU
: The
new EU carbon border tax entered force
on Sunday for a trial period, meaning trading partners will now have to report the emissions tied to various exports. The aim is to ensure a level playing field for those EU firms paying an EU carbon price.
🇱🇦
Laos
: Authorities have unveiled a series of incentives to
encourage citizens to buy electric vehicles
. The head of the national Department of Industry and Handicraft said EVs were crucial to cut the country’s dependence on oil imports.
🇦🇷
Argentina
: Aspiring presidential candidates have faced off in the first of two
debates
ahead of elections on 22 October. Javier Milei, whose platform includes the dollarisation and liberalisation of Argentina’s economy, is currently leading the
polls
.
🇹🇷
Turkey
: Turkey conducted
airstrikes against Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK) targets
in Syria and Iraq over the weekend, following a PKK suicide bombing in Ankara. Turkey says the group is responsible for tens of thousands of deaths over the decades.
🚄
Indonesia | Geopolitics
Indonesia gets its first bullet train
Indonesian President Joko Widodo
inaugurated
Southeast Asia’s first bullet train on Monday after years of delay and $1.2B in unforeseen costs.
The $7.3B high-speed electric train
connects Jakarta to the hub of Bandung 142km away. It can reach speeds of 350 km/h, and cuts the trip between the two major Indonesian cities from three hours to 36 minutes.
The best part?
The train is called WHOOSH, which is a Bahasa acronym for ‘
time-saving, optimal operation, reliable system
’.
During the inauguration
, Indonesia’s investment minister thanked the “
Chinese government and its related companies
”, which financed a significant part of the project through Beijing’s flagship Belt and Road Initiative (BRI).
It’s China’s first full high-speed rail project abroad
, and construction of a
608km high-speed link
is also underway in Thailand. But other
proposed
high-speed links haven’t materialised. Why?
😬
Beijing sometimes
baulks
at local political & security risks, and
💳 Hosts often
baulk
at taking on too much debt.
So most BRI rail projects, like the Ethiopia-Djibouti
link
(opened in 2018) or the Belgrade-Budapest
line
(due 2025), use more conventional rail tech.
Intrigue's take:
The idea behind the BRI was as simple as it was ambitious: Beijing got to deploy its vast savings and absorb its massive industrial overcapacity, while building needed infrastructure and influence abroad.
Many folks in
Asia
and
Africa
certainly seem to dig it, and for Indonesia’s ‘infrastructure president’, the new rail link is also nicely on-brand.
But there’ve long been
questions
around the BRI’s motives and quality, and there’s a sense it’s slowing under its own weight: China has
bailed out
many BRI projects, and now seems to be
paring it back
,
de-risking
it in private, and de-emphasising it in public (at least by initial standards).
Still, the BRI is enshrined in China’s Communist Party
charter
, and entwined with President Xi’s leadership. So while it’ll evolve, it’s probably here to stay.
Also worth noting:
The BRI is marking its
10th year anniversary
this month.
China won the Indonesian high-speed rail contract in 2015 after Jakarta backed away from earlier proposals (including from Japan),
reportedly
on cost grounds.
📰
How newspapers covered…
EU foreign ministers convening in Kyiv
London, UK
“EU ministers visit nervous Kyiv as US pauses aid for Ukraine”
Ankara, Turkey
“EU foreign ministers gather in Kyiv for 1st meeting outside EU”
Kyiv, Ukraine
“German Foreign Minister: EU will soon extend ‘from Lisbon to Luhansk’”
Today’s newsletter is supported by: VERB
As much caffeine as an espresso in a delicious, plant-sized bar that’s ready to unwrap anytime, anywhere.
Conveniently pocket-sized for on-the-go, it’s made with Organic Green Tea and natural ingredients like quinoa and brown rice crisp. You’ve never had energy like this.
The most delicious, convenient way to energize. Organic Green Tea in a plant-based bar that’s perfectly pocket-sized and ready to unwrap anytime, anywhere. Over 3000 5-star reviews.
Get 5 bars for free!
🇲🇿
Mozambique | Geo-economics
Mozambique settles its ‘tuna bond’ scandal
The Swiss-based bank UBS has
agreed
to a settlement with Mozambique to resolve Credit Suisse’s infamous ‘tuna bond’ scandal.
The story goes that Credit Suisse, which UBS absorbed in June, was involved in loaning Mozambique $2.4B in 2013 to purchase a fleet of coast guard and fishing vessels from a company in the UAE.
But the lending program was faulty
and plagued by corruption among both bankers and shipbuilders, and Mozambique was unable to pay Credit Suisse back. Huge sums of cash went missing.
So, when the IMF and other international lenders found out in 2016, they halted their own lending, and the country’s economy collapsed.
Intrigue’s take:
Lenders have power. Multilateral lenders try to intermediate that power across bureaucracies geared (at least in theory) towards transparency and accountability. But this often means things move slowly.
Private lenders, on the other hand, can move quickly, but this Credit Suisse case is a reminder that speed can cost you transparency and accountability.
Also worth noting:
Financial regulators earlier
fined
Credit Suisse ~$425M, and the bank pleaded guilty to wire fraud in 2021.
Malaysia’s prime minister is
threatening
further legal action against Goldman Sachs for its role in the defrauding of a state fund.
🎧 Today on
Intrigue Outloud
Could the US invade Mexico?
Find out here
➕
Extra Intrigue
Here’s what folks have been tweeting about lately.
🇮🇹
Italians
were all about the
“Ryder Cup”
following Team Europe’s
resounding victory
over Team USA in the legendary golf competition.
🇦🇺
Both
#VoteYes
and
#VoteNo
were trending in
Australia
as
early voting
kicked off for the country’s Indigenous Voice to Parliament referendum.
🇸🇿
And
#Elections2023
was trending in the absolute monarchy of
Eswatini
after it
held elections
for parliamentarians who’ll have no law-making powers.
🗳️ Poll time!
Which of the following do you think is the best way to build influence abroad?
💸 Investment
🚢 Trade
🎖️ Security
🎭 Culture
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
🏆
Award of the day
Katalin Karikó and Drew Weissman. Credits: Penn Today.
Sweden’s Nobel Committee
announced
yesterday (Monday) its decision to award Katalin Karikó and Drew Weissman the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for their work on mRNA vaccines. The pair began their joint research after meeting over a copy machine at the University of Pennsylvania in 1998.
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think Ukraine can still count on the US for military aid?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
👍 Yes, this is only a bump in the road  (75%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 👎 No, the signs are clear (20%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!)  (5%)
Your two cents
:
✍️
M:
“The real linchpin is whoever is in the White House on Inauguration Day 2025.”
👍
F.T.M:
“However, this ‘bump in the road’ is troubling as it may cause allies to question just how much U.S. commitment can be counted on.”