URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/industrial-espionage-apple
Title: 🌍 Industrial espionage against Apple

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
The G7 summit kicks off in Hiroshima today. And apparently the participating world leaders have a busy agenda, so they’re just gonna order in some Domino’s. Okay just joking, the
menu
includes sea urchin, Wagyu beef, eel sushi and strawberry ice cream. But they do have a busy agenda.
Today’s briefing is a 3.9 min read:
🍎
Ex-
Apple
employee charged with industrial espionage.
🕊️ African leaders on a
peace mission
to Europe.
➕
Plus:
Some world power word play, how the papers are covering the G7 summit, and a travel-themed quiz to cap off your week.
🎧
Today’s Intrigue Outloud:
How did pollsters get the Turkey election so wrong? A leading Turkish political expert talks to Ethan about what happened, and what’s next.
Listen here!
🗺️ AROUND THE WORLD
🇨🇳
China
: As Japan opens this year’s G7 summit (with an
in-person appearance
by Ukraine’s president), China is kicking off its own
summit with five Central Asian leaders
. China is expanding its influence in the former Soviet states where Russia has long been dominant.
🇬🇷
Greece
: Voters will head to the polls on Sunday for one of the most
unpredictable Greek elections
in years. The right-leaning New Democracy party looks set to perform well, but most expect it’ll fall short of the 46% threshold it needs to rule alone.
🇻🇳
Vietnam
: Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam’s biggest city, is rolling out a series of
energy-saving measures
(like partially shutting down elevators and streetlights) to preserve electricity during a current hot spell. Nearly a third of Vietnam’s energy comes from hydropower.
🇺🇸
US
: Montana has become the first US state to
ban TikTok for all residents
. The governor said the ban, which starts in January, will protect users from TikTok’s ties to the Chinese Communist Party.
🇹🇷
Turkey
: Ankara has decried Germany’s brief
detention of two Turkish-language journalists
, after their pro-government outlet published images of a government critic’s family home. There are around 1.5 million folks in Germany eligible to vote in Turkey’s election.
🇨🇳
CHINA | TECH & SECURITY
Someone’s been taking bytes out of Apple
Ex-Apple employee accused of stealing secrets
Briefly:
The US Department of Justice (DOJ)
has accused
a former Apple engineer of stealing self-driving car secrets from the Californian tech giant before fleeing to China. The case is one of five brought by a new DOJ taskforce working to prevent foreign governments from accessing critical US tech.
US authorities allege the man:
🕵️ Worked secretly for a rival China-based firm while still at Apple
💾
Downloaded reams of sensitive data in his final days at Apple, and
🛫
Got a ticket to China just hours after telling the feds he had no such plans.
The accused has remained in China since then (2018), but could face decades in prison if (and that’s a yuuuge if) he’s ever extradited back to the US.
And this isn’t exactly a one-off
. According to
a recent report
by the Center for Strategic and International Studies:
It’s the third time an ex-Apple employee has faced similar charges
US firms have sued Chinese rivals for IP theft
1,200 times
since 2000, and
There’ve been at least 120 reported instances of China itself conducting espionage against the US to acquire commercial tech.
Intrigue’s take:
This latest
iTheft
dates back to 2018, and a lot’s changed since then. These days, the US is far more wary of China’s attempts at self-sufficiency in cutting edge tech, and last year
moved
to block its access to advanced chips.
In response, Beijing launched a ‘cybersecurity review’ into one top U.S. chip maker (
Micron
), and is scrutinising the acquisition plans of another (
Intel
).
So at this point, it’s hard to see how US-China tech ties could get much worse.
Also worth noting:
Recruiters from China-based firms have been spotted
standing outside South Korean chip factories
, hoping to poach US-educated talent.
Japan and the Netherlands
joined the US in restricting the sale of chip manufacturing technology to China earlier this year.
📰
GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES
How different newspapers covered
: The start of the annual G7 summit in Hiroshima, Japan.
Links
:
NYT
,
Japan Times
,
China Daily
.
Today’s briefing is sponsored by
Upward News
Get smarter about politics.
The Upward News daily brief brings you need-to-know news and insights you won’t find in the mainstream media. No sensationalism, just level-headed analysis. It's free and keeps you informed in just minutes.  Some topics you can expect to see on a daily basis:
The 2024 Election: Coverage of candidates, polling data, campaign strategies, and debates.
Emerging trends in America: Demographics, immigration, social changes, and state politics.
D.C. Politics: Examining legislation, power dynamics, and policy-making in the U.S. capital.
Sign up with one click.
🕊️ AFRICA | GEOPOLITICS
African leaders are hitting the road on a peace mission to Russia and Ukraine
Briefly:
South Africa
announced
this week that a delegation of African leaders will travel to Moscow and Kyiv for peace talks. South African President Cyril Ramaphosa will reportedly lead the group, which will include the leaders of Egypt, Republic of the Congo, Senegal, Uganda and Zambia.
Many African leaders
are well-placed to serve as mediators. They:
🏳️ Have stayed relatively neutral throughout the war, and
🌾
Their countries have felt the war’s impacts, including grain and energy shortages across the African continent.
In other words, they may have the will and the way to make a difference.
Intrigue’s take:
But even the best-intentioned plans are doomed to fail if the conditions for peace aren’t there.
Still, local peace almost always requires global buy-in. So, the more the merrier.
Also worth noting:
Beijing confirmed on Thursday that its new peace envoy
met with Ukrainian President Zelensky
during a two-day visit to Kyiv this week.
G7 leaders will discuss a potential
global peace summit
during their talks in Japan over the weekend.
Russia has
reportedly
agreed to extend a key deal allowing Ukraine to export crops via the Black Sea, according to Turkish officials.
👀
EXTRA INTRIGUE
The following words are anagrams of four world leader surnames. Can you unscramble them all?
Dashiki
Samoa harp
Oilmen
Groaned
🗺️
MAP OF THE DAY
Credits: Sovereign Limits.
Did you know France and the Netherlands share a border?
Not in Europe, but on the Caribbean island of Saint Martin/Sint Maarten, which the two European powers have split since the Treaty of Concordia in 1648. The movement to unify the island recently picked up steam when Covid border closures
led to protests
.
🗳️ QUIZ TIME!
1) Which of the following cities has the most underground stations in the world?
a) London
b) New York City
c) Shanghai
d) Tokyo
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) Which of the following is the busiest flight route in the world in terms of scheduled seats?
a) Jeju - Seoul Gimpo
b) Las Vegas - Los Angeles
c) Melbourne - Sydney
d) Beijing Daxing - Guangzhou Baiyun
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) Which of the following is the longest direct rail route in the world?
a) The Trans-Siberian railway (Moscow to Vladivostok)
b) The Canadian (Toronto to Vancouver)
c) Beijing - Lhasa railway (Beijing to Lhasa)
d) Indian Pacific (Sydney to Perth)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Anagram answers
: 1- Kishida (Japanese PM), 2- Ramaphosa (South African president), 3- Meloni (Italian PM), 4- Erdogan (Turkish president)
Quiz answers:
1- b, 2-a, 3-a.