URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/intrigue-s-2024-in-review
Title: 🌎 Intrigue's 2024 in review

IN TODAY’S EDITION
1️⃣ Intrigue’s 2024 in review
2️⃣ Flag of the year
3️⃣ Your end-of-year quiz
Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Sure, there are
technically
a few days left, but we’re officially rounding this year up. It’s a gimme. So this will be our last daily briefing for 2024, but (after a couple more Intrigue surprises) we’ll be back from Friday 3 January.
As for the year that’s been? Despite it all, we’re fundamentally optimistic about where our world can go, and we appreciate you making Intrigue part of your journey. So with that, let’s dive into our
2024 year in review
, focusing less on the conflicts that’ve dominated the headlines (including our own right below), and more on some of the slower-moving trends now shaping our world. See you in 2025.
THE HEADLINES
Saudi national charged over Germany’s Christmas market attack.
A psychiatrist is facing murder charges after
speeding his BMW into a Christmas market
in the German city of Magdeburg on Friday night, leaving at least five dead and 200 injured. Authorities haven’t announced a motive, though the suspect, Taleb al-Abdulmohsen, has previously described himself as an ex-Muslim, anti-Islamic activist.
The latest from the Russo-Ukraine war.
Slovakia’s Russia-friendly leader, Robert Fico, has
made a surprise visit to Moscow
in an attempt to salvage his supply of cheap Russian gas, which looks set to wind down now that Ukraine is declining to renew a key pipeline deal. Meanwhile, Moscow has vowed to retaliate after Ukrainian
drones hit Russia’s distant city of Kazan
.
US drops bounty on new Syria leader.
Following direct talks, Washington has
dropped its $10M bounty
for the rebel leader who ousted Assad, Ahmad al-Sharaa (aka al-Golani). Meanwhile, there’s still no word on a ceasefire-hostage deal between Israel and Hamas, which has been “
close
” for weeks.
Trump suggests retaking Panama Canal.
The US president-elect has described Panama’s canal fees as “
ridiculous
” and
suggested the canal be handed back to the US
, which controlled the waterway until 1999. He’s also alluded to China’s growing influence in Panama, which has rebuffed the comments.
TOP STORY
Intrigue’s 2024 in review
1. Incumbents are out
Whether it was the right getting booted in the UK or the left in the US, or populists getting clipped from South Africa to India, this was
a tough year to hold power
. Sure, there were exceptions (looking at you Ireland and Mexico, where incumbents held on), plus some fake elections (hi Vlad and probably Mozambique). Oh, and some folks just ousted their leaders without a vote (
adios
Assad, and
au revoir
Sheikh Hasina).
But either way, voters really wanted change. And yet… it was often unclear what they wanted instead. Take
France
, where voters opted for a three-way parlay, leading to today’s gridlock with no obvious exit. To us, it’s one of many examples of governments struggling with unwieldy inboxes, and voters getting unhappy with the results.
But we’re optimists, so let’s also give a shout-out to
Uruguay
, which showed us the way — they held remarkably civil and unifying elections, backed by a ~90% turnout.
2. Resource competition
Junta-led Burkina Faso, Niger, Mali, and Chad and others are seeking a greater share of the
mining spoils
, in a year when capitals are already fretting to secure access to anything critical for their military, tech, and energy transition. Of course, this isn’t limited to Africa, but it seems unlikely to slow down at either end of the sandwich: Mali has now issued an arrest warrant for the CEO of the world’s 2nd-largest gold-miner (Barrick).
And yet, it’s not just about getting a bigger slice. It’s also part of a
broader chess game
: eg, Russian mercenaries are riding local waves of anti-Western sentiment, while US-China competition plays out across the continent. It’s all a resource and influence war disguised as a partnership, and it sometimes leaves local players holding more of the cards.
3. Defence spending
Despite Sweden finally snagging a spot in NATO’s ranks, the security picture is still murky for Europe — there (like everywhere else) capitals are ramping up spending ✌️thanks✌️ in large part to Russia’s ongoing invasion on their doorstep. But spending is
only part of the problem
. For example, across 11 major categories of weapons systems, the US fields a total of 32 different types. Europe? A chaotic 172. Streamlining isn’t an EU strong suit.
The new NATO chief Mark Rutte, famously dubbed ‘
The Trump whisperer
’, has a tough gig ahead, though there’s plenty of optimism that if anyone can help steer this NATO ship through turbulent times, it’s good ol’ bicycle-riding, antique-Nokia-using Marky Mark.
4. Climate diplomacy
This year’s COP29 climate talks generated less buzz and delivered
weaker outcomes
, and the reasons go beyond the host: sure, Azerbaijan is no environmental pin-up, but neither were Egypt and the UAE before them. And yet, those two summits were still buzzy affairs.
What gives?
We’re witnessing a shift in who drives the conversation, both at home and abroad: as government to-do lists grow, voices in the climate space are struggling to get heard. But Mother Nature is now doing more of the talking herself, whether via record droughts in Latin America, record floods in Europe, or record temperatures globally.
5. The tech race
This year, we saw social media platforms bump up against governments everywhere: whether it was alleged online disinformation in Brazil, incitement to hatred in the UK, unrest in Pakistan, data breaches in the EU, censorship in Turkey, online safety in Australia, exploitation material in France, or national security in the US (ahead of a possible TikTok ban), governments everywhere are now on the offensive.
So
what’s the cause of this emerging ‘splinternet’?
Tech is now a globalising force in a rapidly de-globalising world. For capitals, that means reasserting themselves as the arbiters of what’s acceptable online within their own borders — or at least rejecting the notion that the arbiters should be foreign tech tycoons. And for CEOs of all stripes, it’s a reminder that this world is no longer a single market ripe for the taking.
6. It’s tariff time
The world is bracing for
more protectionism
, just as global trade hits an all-time record of ~$33T. This shift isn’t because of new insights into what protectionism can and can’t do. Rather, it’s because calculations have shifted, leading some governments to conclude that the costs are now worth it, whether to protect an industry, support a constituency, tackle unfairness, keep local prices low, force more investment, or curb a rival.
These justifications all in turn stem from a broader sense that maybe globalisation didn’t deliver on its promises after all. And while it all plays out, many businesses and investors everywhere will hit pause rather than risk getting the rug pulled.
Tell a friend about Intrigue!
Remember when…
🇸🇰
Slovakia’s
leader Robert Fico was shot five times back in
May
,
leaving him out of action for weeks.
🇵🇭
The Philippines
saw palace intrigue in
November
, when the VP threatened the president’s life
if
(all-time caveat here) the president assassinated her first.
🇲🇽
Mexico
elected Claudia Sheinbaum back in
July
,
with the ex-mayor of Mexico City inheriting a political system that just voted away key checks and balances.
🇮🇷
Iran’s
President
Ebrahim Raisi died in a helicopter crash in
May
, alongside the country’s foreign minister and several others.
And
🇸🇳
Senegal’s
Bassirou Diomaye Faye somehow went from prison to president-elect in only 11 days, taking office back in
April
.
From Our Sponsors
AI companies record all your conversations
Claude and ChatGPT collect and share your thoughts with advertisers and government agencies (OpenAI appointed a former NSA director to their board this year). There’s a better way with
Venice.ai
, a private and uncensored AI platform.
Ask Uncensored AI
Flag of the year
Kyrgyzstan’s old (above) vs new (below) flag.
Kyrgyzstan decided its wavy rays simply didn’t suit the nation’s vibes, as sunflowers are seen as a sign of fickleness. So it swapped wavy for straight and a lighter shade of red. Like hair on your prom night, sometimes all you need is a little zschoozsch.
A few of our favourite things in 2024
📖
Read
Challenger
by Adam Higginbotham, a beautiful if painful exploration of what exactly went wrong in the 1986 Challenger disaster.
Butter
by Asako Yuzuki, masterfully fusing the tension of a murder mystery, the unique backdrop of Japanese culture, and mouth-watering food.
The Mysterious, Meteoric Rise of Shein
by Timothy McLaughlin,
a fascinating look at how the fast fashion giant weaved its way to global dominance.
The British Are Coming: The War for America, Lexington to Princeton, 1775-1777
by Rick Atkinson, who somehow makes a 500+ page history book on the American Revolution feel like you’re watching it all unfold from your sofa.
🎧
Listen
Evita
by
The Rest is History
, a thrilling five-part podcast on the life, death, and enduring legacy of Eva Peron, Argentina’s near-mythical first lady.
The Runaway Princesses
, a gripping four-part podcast on the lives of a UAE sheik’s daughters.
After Hotel Rwanda
,
a podcast marking 30 years since the Rwandan genocide, looking at the diplomatic negotiations behind a local activist’s unlawful detention.
The Comedy Bang Bang Podcast
. This one will divide opinion like Jeremy’s sense of humour — some will laugh until they cry, others will laugh until they stop, others will just cry, and many will be confused. Nonetheless, if you dig SNL’s brand of hit-or-miss improv comedy, this is that, but for your ears.
📺
Watch
Black Doves
, a new spy thriller starring Keira Knightly, M15, the CIA, and a hitman or two to keep you on your toes.
The Agency
,
another spy thriller but this time starring Michael Fassbender, returning fresh to the screen after years of bending fass.
The Diplomat
,
which somehow makes diplomat life look hip (oh, and we’re delighted to count some of the show’s producers and writers as Intriguers - hi
👋
).
Dahomey
tells the story of 26 historical artefacts returned from France to Benin, winning top film festival gongs along the way.
Quiz: Were you paying attention in 2024?
1) Which country's election came *very* close to recording its lowest turnout rate in a century?
🇮🇳 India
🇺🇸 The US
🇬🇧 The UK
🇲🇽 Mexico
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) Which country's economy is projected to grow by over 40% this year?
🇰🇮 Kiribati
🇧🇼 Botswana
🇬🇾 Guyana
🇴🇲 Oman
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) How many Mpox vaccine doses are expected to be available for distribution this year?
300,000
1.3 million
2.8 million
5.9 million
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
4) Which country became the 5th-ever nation to land on the moon?
🇮🇳 India
🇮🇹 Italy
🇨🇳 China
🇯🇵 Japan
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
5) Who won this year's Nobel Peace Prize?
Motaz Azaiza (Photojournalist)
Nihon Hidankyo (Nuclear-focussed NGO)
Julian Assange (WikiLeaks)
World Uyghur Congress (Uyghur NGO)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
6) What was the name of the ship that hit the Francis Scott Key Bridge in Baltimore?
HMM Oslo
Ever Given
MV Dali
MSC Irina
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
7) Which country won this year's Eurovision song contest?
🇮🇹 Italy
🇬🇧 UK
🇸🇪 Sweden
🇨🇭 Switzerland
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate