URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/intrigue-s-2025-in-review
Title: 🌍 Intrigue's 2025 in review

Today’s briefing:
— Intrigue’s 2025 in review
— Our tips for your break
— Have you been paying attention?
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Headlines back in 1903 focused on the passing of Pope Leo XIII, but history now remembers that year for man’s first powered flight.
Likewise, folks in 1492 were gripped by Spain’s reconquest of Granada, largely unaware that Columbus was already busy etching that year into history via his big Americas voyage.
So how will eternity recall 2025?
We explore some of the possibilities below, though I can’t help but wonder if this year will enter history for reasons we’ve not even clocked yet.
We’ll be back in your inbox on Friday, but until then, enjoy the break!
Intrigue’s 2025 in review
The year of the Labubu?
1. Don’t F with Gen Z
It’s easy to diss the Gen Zs, what with their Adidas Sambas, relaxed silhouettes, and bedazzled early-2000s accessories. But maybe this is the year we learned to look past the crochet bucket cap and sustainable statement bags, and listen to the folks wearing them.
Whether it’s in Asia, Africa, the Americas, or beyond,
irked youths
have filled the streets and even ousted governments over corruption, inequality, and stagnation. And to put things in perspective, in a broader world fretting about declining birth rates, almost
half
of Southeast Asia's population is now under 30 — that’s 320 million people (aka a ~USA).
So while the contours of this social-media-mobilised phenomenon keep evolving, the basic message seems pretty clear: this generation refuses to inherit the world as it is.
2. Tariffic or tarrifying?
In amongst the jokes about tariffing penguins (sucked in Heard Island), or dunking on tiny Lesotho until it buys more Salesforce seats, a massive shift unfolded when
China hit back so hard
it almost crashed the world’s safest market (US Treasury bonds).
That’s how Trump learned President Xi had spent the inter-regnum
doubling down on self-sufficiency
, bringing us to today’s eerie truce — two powers grabbing one another by the painful bits (rare earths and chips) while they plot their next move.
Meanwhile, with the US pulling up its dam wall and
deflecting China’s export wave elsewhere
, the rest of the world suddenly realised it was in the arena, too, with a growing list of markets quietly putting up their own trade barriers in response.
3. Speak loudly and carry a big stick
Trump 2.0’s initial jabs at Greenland, Panama, and even the world’s
Ned Flanders of dream neighbours
(Canada) hinted at a new ‘Donroe’ Doctrine: 47’s revival of Monroe’s declaration that the US would be pre-eminent in the Western Hemisphere.
And as if further proof were needed, the US leader has now deployed
a historic armada
against Venezuela’s dictator, and literally spelled it out in his National Security Strategy as “
The Trump Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine
” (surely “
Donroe
” would’ve been punchier?).
But as for
the US elsewhere
, it’s been a mix: foreshadowing a Europe drawdown then Congress tapping the brakes; seeking Middle East disentanglement then leading Gaza’s post-war process; and all while using the kiddie gloves on the Kremlin’s latest imperialist.
As for Trump 2.0’s approach to China?
Things now look more transactional, but DC is still hustling to beef up the Indo-Pacific in hopes of deterring any shock moves by Beijing. Just take a look at that massive arms sale the US waved through to Taiwan on Thursday.
Meanwhile, the world is busy reaching its own conclusions about where the US is headed — Germany’s Merz might’ve made history when he declared, “
Pax Americana is over.
”
4. Bad neighbours
As US power shifts, age-old neighbourhood spats burst up through the pavement cracks — like May’s four-day war between
nuclear-armed India and Pakistan
, culminating in a historic dogfight between ~125 fighter jets. The real winner seems to have been China’s arms industry, given evidence its J-10Cs outperformed France’s Rafales.
Meanwhile, any winners seem less clear further east in the continued
Thailand-Cambodia
skirmishes, though maybe a loser here could be the notion that strong-arming these two ancient neighbours into signing an incomplete peace deal was ever the answer.
Perhaps the brightest spot is between
Armenia and Azerbaijan
, with August’s historic US-brokered accord getting them as close to peace as we’ve seen. Though even that only became possible after Azerbaijan’s shock 2023 offensive ‘resolved’ their dispute by force.
5. Bargaining chips
China’s year of the snake links 2025 with being more
intelligent
,
mysterious
, and
strategic
. And darnnit, but isn’t that a pretty apt description for our tech of the year?
Think of the examples, whether ChatGPT as the app of the year, or AI’s architects as Time’s Person of the Year, or American chipmaker Nvidia not just becoming history’s first firm to reach a $4T valuation, but then a $5T valuation
just four months later
!
Inevitably, something that powerful and moving that rapidly will have huge
geopolitical ramifications
. As the US just put it (semi-clunkily) in its Pax Silica, “
If the 20th century ran on oil and steel, the 21st century runs on compute and the minerals that feed it.
”
You can see it playing out in just one leather-clad 62-year-old,
Nvidia’s Jensen Huang
, navigating not only the geopolitical Bermuda Triangle that is China-US-Taiwan ties, but also the tensions at the heart of the tech: how fast you go versus who you hurt; private profit versus national interest; and hook China on US tech, versus ice it out and race.
In the end, Trump backed Huang’s hook strategy, approving powerful chips for China.
6. Fortress Europe?
Nobody likes a told-you-so, but Intrigue’s 2024 review warned our world was “
bracing for more protectionism
”, and we’re here in 2025 warning you to brace for even more ahead.
One of the biggest questions is how that plays out in Europe, where its massive single market risks
shifting from asset to liability
: one day, Renault executives in Boulogne-Billancourt convince Brussels to probe China’s EV subsidies. The next, China hits back at Hennessy executives in Cognac, or pork fatteners in Aragón, or dairy farmers in Cork.
But eventually,
Europe’s survival instincts
might drown out any executives squabbling over a pie that China is now shrinking via industrial policy (ie, to make stuff, not import it).
You can see that survival instinct reawakening already, whether in the continent’s historic ~tripling of its
arms
factory expansion, its re-issuance of
eurobonds
to back Ukraine, or the easing of Germany’s infamous
debt
brake to unshackled Europe’s largest economy.
And through it all is something we’ve not seen in a long, long time:
a Germany out front
.
Remember when…
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
Surprise!
China-based DeepSeek released its AI chatbot in
January
, blindsiding Silicon Valley with its high-capability, low-cost, and rapidly-developed new offering.
🇸🇾
SYRIA
-
A new Sharaa in town.
Syria’s new jihadist-turned-statesman Ahmed al-Sharaa made his first trip abroad in
February
, using a visit to Saudi Arabia to signal his nation’s pivot away from Iran.
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
New phone Houthis?
US natsec leaders mistakenly added a journalist to a group chat discussing imminent Houthi strikes in
March
.
🇰🇷
SOUTH KOREA
-
We’re done here.
The constitutional court voted to remove Yoon Suk Yeol from the presidency in
April
over his failed bid to declare martial law last December.
🇻🇦
VATICAN CITY
-
Habemus papam.
The Vatican elected the world’s first US-born pope in
May
, causing us to lose a bet and buy you NYC drinks in
June
(thanks to our Czech embassy friends for hosting!).
🇹🇷
TURKEY
-
A time for peace?
Turkey’s long-time Kurdish foes in the PKK formally began laying down their arms in
July
, after shocking the world with their earlier pledge to disband.
🇳🇨
NEW CALEDONIA
-
Not so fast.
New Caledonia’s pro-independence opposition rejected an accord with Paris in
August
, so President Macron is now resuming fraught talks over the French territory’s status next month.
🇺🇳
UNITED NATIONS
-
Recognise.
Several Western leaders (including from France, the UK, Canada, and Australia) used New York’s
September
General Assembly to
recognise a State of Palestine
.
Flag of the year
Getting the obvious out of the way, this is not a country’s flag. Actually, no countries appear to have changed their flag this year (we’re counting Syria’s switch as a 2024 event).
Rather, per our Gen Z snippet above, this pirate from Japanese anime
One Piece
began to pop up in youth-led protests everywhere from Indonesia and Madagascar to Nepal and the Philippines, emerging as a new rallying symbol for the world’s angry young’ns.
A few of our favourite things from 2025
📖
Read…
Breakneck
by Dan Wang, exploring China's seismic progress, the human costs, and what it might all mean for America.
This
NYT reflection
on what Silicon Valley thinks about Beijing’s AI take, and how China’s tech bro ambitions differ from their Western counterparts.
Mother Mary Comes to Me
by India’s Arundhati Roy, a memoir exploring the author’s complicated, layered, bracing relationship with her mother.
Murder Most Foul
by one of Britain’s best-loved screenwriters (Guy Jenkin), a historical mystery novel with Shakespeare himself in the role of detective.
How Narcotraffickers Captured the British Virgin Islands
, a fascinating long read from Britain’s Edward Siddons on crime, politics, and Hurricane Irma.
🎧
Listen to…
Ndonwabile
, an Amapiano track by South African producer Kelvin Momo, featuring vocalists Raspy and Babalwa M.
The Great Northern War
by ‘
The Rest is History
’, chronicling the 18th C war between Russia’s Peter the Great and Sweden’s Charles XII — a source for much of today’s Russian revanchism.
The Outlaw Ocean
podcast, exploring our world’s most lawless place: the vast, unpoliceable ocean.
Francesca
and the entirety of ‘
Ismatricule ou l'Odyssée du Groove
’, a groovy, funky, feel-good album by Moroccan-born artist Ismatricule.
Superagency
by Reid Hoffman and Greg Beato — it's definitely AI-optimist pilled, but still a great take on a rosy future of AI for humanity.
📺
Watch…
Black Bag
, arguably the espionage thriller of the year, starring Cate Blanchett and Michael Fassbender as married British intelligence officers.
Made in the EU
, a Bulgarian film following a female factory worker who becomes the first in her town to contract Covid-19.
The Mastermind
, a funny heist tale set in the 1970s and starring one of our favourite actors these days, Britain’s Josh O’Connor.
The Voice of Hind Rajab
by Tunisia’s Kaouther Ben Hania, who won the second-highest honour at this year’s Venice Film Festival for her Gaza docudrama.
The American Revolution
by Ken Burns, on how 13 colonies won independence and formed a government that reshaped the continent (and the world).
Your end-of-year quiz
Were you paying attention in 2025?
1) Which new leader was in a heavy metal band in their youth?
🇯🇵 Sanae Takaichi
🇰🇷 Lee Jae Myung
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) What was the year's biggest IPO?
🇭🇰 CATL in Hong Kong
🇺🇸 Medline in New York
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) Which country joined BRICS this year?
🇮🇷 Iran
🇮🇩 Indonesia
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
4) The longest-ever US government shutdown lasted...
43 days
52 days
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
5) When was the last time Mexican diplomats received a pay rise?
2008
1998
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
(Here’s
the link
to
our diplomat salary report
in case you missed it!)