URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/intrigue-s-2026-predictions
Title: 🌍 Intrigue's 2026 predictions

Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. We’re back from our team retreat with some big plans for 2026, though it’s tricky to think beyond that weekend our world just had. In addition to Spain’s shock train crash and Pakistan’s horror mall blaze…
There’s the massive US military build-up in the Middle East, fuelling speculation of an imminent hit on Iran (where even officials say protests have left
5,000
dead)
President Trump has doubled down on his Greenland demands, threatening tariffs that risk reviving the US-EU trade war and up-ending NATO, and
Mark Carney has made a big splash in Beijing, seemingly describing China as a more predictable partner than the US, all while signalling that Canada has options
But even if you fled to ESPN for a bit of sports escapism, you instead saw the Africa Cup of Nations deliver one of the most chaotic soccer finals in memory, with Senegal actually storming off the field in protest at one point before edging out host nation Morocco.
Anyway, maybe it’s precisely because of all the noise that it’s worth taking a deep breath, zooming out a little, and making
some forecasts for the year ahead
. Shall we dive in?
Number of the day
3.3%
That’s the IMF’s latest projected 2026 global growth rate, up 0.2 from last October thanks to substantial investment in the tech sector and a surprising resilience to tariff shocks.
Intrigue’s 2026 predictions
The ‘For-sures’
1. Europe can’t shake the US
While it’s easy to rag on Europe’s passive statements, consider the task European leaders have ahead: EU citizens shop with Visa or Mastercard, scroll on US-made devices from Google to Apple, watch viral shows on Netflix and HBO, and still even rely heavily on US military equipment. These aren’t switches you can make overnight.
Likelihood: 99%
2. Cryptocurrency goes mainstream
Bipartisan backing has paved the way for crypto-friendly regulation in the US, further entrenching the role of stablecoins in American capital markets. That’ll influence other global players, and likely push the EU to re-think its own central-bank-led approach.
Likelihood: 90%
3. Tech giants go (more) nuclear
All the clicks, likes, and AI-generated memes will keep driving energy demand to new heights, forcing firms like Meta to further take charge of their energy future with more nuclear commitments, rather than waiting for any decisive policy shifts.
Likelihood: 85%
4. No AI bubble
Everyone’s waiting for the AI bubble to pop. We don’t think it will—at least not as a US stock-market collapse. Instead, we’ll see investors move abroad to markets like the UK, Japan, and Europe for many reasons: diffusion of AI technologies, a weakening USD, and economic tailwinds fanned by fiscal stimulus and governance reforms.
Likelihood: 80%
5. No Russo-Ukraine peace
While there’s been plenty of shuttle diplomacy, peace doesn’t seem much closer, largely because one of the parties (Putin) doesn’t want it. And that’s because he seems to think — absent any sudden implosion — that time is on his side. The free world has the tools to disabuse Putin of that notion, but still not the will.
Likelihood: 80%
‘We're confident’
6. The pink tide recedes across Latin America
Colombia’s hard-right firebrand Abelardo de la Espriella will crush Colombia’s May–June elections, capitalising on public fatigue over insecurity and promising he can deliver a Bukele-style crackdown on organised crime, plus a Milei-style economic revival. We’ll see a similar rightward shift play out in elections across Peru (April/June) and Brazil (October).
Likelihood: 70%
7. Argentina adopts the dollar via the backdoor
What’s this, another crypto prediction? You bet—crypto is the most underreported story in geopolitics. This year, Argentina will become the first major economy to formally permit stablecoin payments for everyday commerce, creating a parallel dollar-denominated system alongside the peso. After year-on-year inflation peaked just under 300% in 2024, stablecoins accounted for ~60% of all crypto transactions in the country. With the Milei government having secured a $20B IMF loan, and banks set to offer crypto services from April 2026, formalising stablecoin payments is the next logical step.
Likelihood: 65%
8. World breaches 1.4°C barrier for fourth year running
The year’s global average temperature will be around 1.46°C above the pre-industrial average, becoming one of the four warmest years on record — that’s as world powers struggle to bridge their differences to slow emissions and accelerate adaptation efforts.
Likelihood: 60%
9. BRICS stack up, the Quad breaks down
India will host the 18th BRICS Summit in Delhi in August, welcoming a significantly expanded bloc. In stark contrast, the Quad (the US, Japan, India, Australia) got one fleeting mention in Trump’s new National Security Strategy. For the supposed cornerstone of the US Indo-Pacific strategy, that feels like a eulogy — India’s Quad Summit for November is now postponed “
for scheduling reasons
”.
Likelihood: 60%
10. Mass UN layoffs
Driven by US withdrawals from various bodies and a shortfall in funding from several other hesitant donor states, the UN will now rush to consolidate and streamline its work. Whoever emerges as the next Secretary-General (whether Argentina’s Grossi, Chile’s Bachelet or beyond) might inherit a UN system in freefall.
Likelihood: 60%
The ‘Coin flips’
11. Iran’s mullahs hold on
Raging protests gave hope Tehran’s rulers might be on their way out, but with key factions closing ranks, fearful folks staying home, and US intentions unclear, the mullahs are now better positioned to survive. But the reality is Iran’s widespread despair won’t lift until Iran’s economy stabilises — and that won’t happen until its regime normalises.
Likelihood: 50%
12. China chip output overtakes the US
China will achieve near-parity in domestic chip production, matching (in volume if not quality) US output in some key segments. Driven by pressure from US export controls and a surging domestic market, we’ll likely see China’s
DeepSeek moment
for hardware, as the country’s AI investments boom, hardware capabilities accelerate, and AI adoption overtakes the US.
Likelihood: 50%
13. Democracy gets the AI treatment
We’ll see AI tools proliferate across Western democracies to support more public participation and deliberation. Already popular in Taiwan, AI will play an important role in large-scale public consultations, helping synthesise citizen inputs and finding common ground to help reduce polarisation. How much public trust this tech retains remains the question…
Likelihood: 50%
The ‘Eh, maybe?’
14. Startups break the fusion barrier
Accelerated by AI, at least one US startup will generate net energy using fusion (the energy that powers stars), bringing a holy grail of energy abundance another step closer and reshaping geopolitical calculations across energy-starved capitals everywhere.
Likelihood: 40%
15. M23 announces Congo independence
Despite both US and Qatar-brokered deals, fighting in eastern DR Congo hasn’t abated, with rumours the Rwanda-backed M23 rebels want to consolidate their power by establishing an autonomous region. There’ll always be hot-heads wanting more, announcing a completely separate country and triggering renewed Congo violence.
Likelihood: 40%
16. Midterm night becomes midterm month
With Democrats now polling to retake the House in November, the White House will treat this as an existential threat. Any resulting limbo will have geopolitical consequences: European allies will publicly distance themselves from the US and accelerate their planning for a post-US NATO. And China, having seen it all coming, will “
coincidentally
” launch its largest military exercises ever, in waters off Taiwan and Japan.
Likelihood: 40%
17. Belarusian dictator makes first visit to DC
It’s no secret the US and Belarus are rekindling their ties. Last year, the Belarusians greeted the new US special envoy with the release of 14 political prisoners. DC could be seeking to cleave Minsk from Moscow, or perhaps find another channel through which to influence the ongoing Russo-Ukraine peace talks. Lukashenko, on the other hand, is just delighted to be seen as an important world leader.
Likelihood: 35%
18. The US ‘soft’ nationalises Intel
Even after (some might say because of!) Trump’s deal for a 9.9% stake in Intel —unprecedented for a domestic company in peacetime — the US chipmaker continues to struggle: a ~$3B operating loss in mid-2025, and its flagship Ohio fab delayed again. President Trump recently praised Intel’s new-ish CEO, but if the company continues to falter, Washington will need to choose between letting America’s semiconductor ambitions fail, or doubling down via a bigger stake (with voting rights).
Likelihood: 35%
19. The US recognises Somaliland
Driven by Trump’s instinct to broadly align with Israel in the region, and by the opportunity to counter Chinese and Turkish influence in the Horn of Africa, the Trump Administration will join Israel in recognising Somalia’s breakaway territory of Somaliland.
Likelihood: 30%
20. Turkey and Israel fight over Syria
Since Assad hit the highway to Moscow in December 2024, Turkey and Israel have been at odds over their competing visions for Syria, with Turkey even severing trade and economic ties in 2024, then banning certain aircraft and ship visits last year. The odds of a proxy confrontation are on the rise.
Likelihood: 30%
The ‘Unprecedented times’
21. Water scarcity triggers Mekong pushback
China’s upstream dams will contribute to record-low water flows through Vietnam and Thailand, pushing the two Southeast Asian powers to finally deepen their cooperation and get more assertive in demanding better data-sharing from — and coordinated management with — China.
Likelihood: 25%
22. Tajikistan withdraws from ‘Russian NATO’
The Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), aka “
Russia’s NATO
”, has been on life support for years. A crisis on Tajikistan’s border with Afghanistan (the Tajik government reported several incursions just last month) could push Dushanbe straight into Beijing’s arms and spell an effective end to Moscow’s security influence over Central Asia.
Likelihood: 25%
23. The Arctic’s cold war heats up
The Arctic is getting crowded. As sea ice retreats, shipping and military patrols will surge into the same cold, tight spaces, chasing shorter routes and valuable resources. With Russia, China, and the US all leaning in—and no reliable way to keep encounters from spiralling—we’re likely to see a real-world flashpoint: a near-collision, an aggressive interception gone wrong, or a commercial ship caught in the crossfire.
Likelihood: 25%
24. The US gets dragged into a border war in Venezuela
With Washington effectively calling the shots in post-Maduro Venezuela, Colombia’s ‘ELN’ guerrillas will exploit the power vacuum in Caracas and push across the border. Washington will be forced to step in — directly or through aligned local forces — to prevent an insurgency from taking hold.
Likelihood: 20%
25. China signs a security agreement with Haiti
The world seems to have moved on from the violence still devastating Haiti. Despite UN-backed forces and US mercenaries, gangs still run the island, making life unliveable for its ~12M people. So having lost its man in Caracas, China might now move to cultivate stronger ties in Haiti, triggering another standoff with Trump.
Likelihood: 15%
Today’s poll
What type of year do you think we'll have?
(geopolitically speaking)
😴 Pretty calm, everything already "happened"
⚡ We'll have some shocks, but a lot of consolidating
🥵 Get ready for some unprecedented times
✍️ Other (write in your prediction!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Our last edition’s poll:
What do you think causes Havana Syndrome?
☢️ Environmental factors (6%)
🤕
Psychosomatic factors (13%)
🔊
A weapon of some sort (79%)
✍️ Other (write in!)  (2%)
Your two cents:
🔊
C.D:
“Maybe a few were targeted and the symptoms transferred to others psychosomatically.”
🤕
R.J:
“The idea our adversaries have a weapon out of a SCI-FI novel, and not based in reality, only builds an unhelpful narrative of their overall strength. Overestimating our enemies can be just as deadly as underestimating them.”