URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/iran-pulls-the-trigger-israel-vows-revenge
Title: 🌍 Iran pulls the trigger, Israel vows revenge

IN TODAY’S EDITION
1️⃣ Iran pulls the trigger
2️⃣ The Intrigue jobs board
3️⃣ Record of the day
Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
I first heard about the ‘Iron Dome’ on the news as a teenager. Back then, I’d naively assumed the dome was an actual apparatus which appeared during times of conflict, not dissimilar to the ‘Protega Maxima’ charm around Hogwarts in
Harry Potter
, and I gave it no further thought.
I was then thoroughly embarrassed to be corrected of this erroneous assumption during my pre-posting security briefing, when I learned that the Iron Dome was actually a sophisticated air defence system with a 90% success rate in intercepting incoming missiles.
But as Israel’s regional conflicts have intensified, the Iron Dome has started to show (figurative) cracks. For one, adversaries have worked out how to fire weapons that fly below the system’s interception radars (like anti-tank missiles or UAVs). And two, there may soon be too many missiles fired at the Iron Dome for its system to intercept and take out.
We’ll dive into the latest in the region’s evolving conflict in our top story today.
THE HEADLINES
US VP debate stays policy-heavy
Tim Waltz and JD Vance took to the debate stage last night (Tuesday) for what ended up a relatively civil and policy-heavy conversation, as the two sparred on everything from the economy to the 2020 election results. For more analysis, don’t miss our next edition of
Election Intrigue
: our weekly briefing on what the US election means for the world.
Oil prices jump on latest Middle East escalation.
The price of Brent crude has
jumped 2.6%
since Iran’s latest attack on Israel and Netanyahu’s subsequent pledge to retaliate (more on that below). Iran is a member of OPEC and supplies around 4% of global output (~90% of Iran’s oil exports go to China).
French parliament heckles new PM’s first address.
Michel Barnier
gave his inaugural speech
in parliament yesterday amid heckles and boos. He pledged to increase taxes, bring France’s debt under control, and continue support for Ukraine. Barnier’s address was a key early test for his government, which lacks a clear majority in the legislature.
Defector arrested after trying to defect back to North Korea in stolen bus.
South Korean authorities have arrested a North Korean defector after he
rammed a border barricade
with a stolen bus while trying to head back north. He had reportedly been trying to return to North Korea after living for more than a decade in the South.
TOP STORY
Iran pulls the trigger, Israel vows revenge
Iranian projectiles above the Israeli city of Ashdod. Credit: Hazem Bader, Getty
A senior US official set off panic yesterday (Tuesday), telling reporters that the White House believed Iran was preparing an
“imminent ballistic missile”
attack on Israel.
And within three hours, Tehran had proved the White House right, just four days after Israel assassinated Iran-backed Hezbollah chief Hassan Nasrallah in Beirut, and two months after Israel took out Iran-backed Hamas chief Ismail Haniyeh in Tehran.
It felt like an eternity between the White House’s heads-up and Iran then pulling the trigger, so
here’s a rough timeline (Tuesday DC time)
:
9.00am
:
White House warns of imminent ballistic missile attack
9.30am
:
US embassy directs employees to shelter in place
10.00am
:
Israeli military spokesperson says Israel is fully prepared
10.15am
:
Air sirens sound and Israelis enter bomb shelters
11.00am
:
US and Israeli defence chiefs speak via phone
11.30am
:
Israeli war cabinet meets underground in Jerusalem
12 noon
:
Iran launches ~200 missiles (7pm Israel time)
12.15pm
: Iranian missiles enter Israel
12.30pm
:
Iran’s
Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps
(IRGC)
describes the missiles as a response to the “
martyrdom
” of Haniyeh (Hamas), Nasrallah (Hezbollah), and Nilforushan (IRGC commander killed alongside Nasrallah on Friday)
~1.30-2.00pm
:
Sirens cease,
airspace reopens, and Israelis leave shelters
And that’s when the next phase of messaging and strategising began.
Tehran messaged out
(
via
its UN mission
in New York like last time) that any Israeli reaction would be met with
“a subsequent and crushing response.”
Israel messaged out
that it would indeed be retaliating, with Netanyahu calling Iran’s move a “
big mistake”
and
pledging
Iran will
“pay for it”
.
And
Washington
’s afternoon then gave way to a flurry of Pentagon, White House, and State Department briefings, with the main bullet point being that the US will continue to back its Israeli allies:
Jake Sullivan
(the US national security advisor)
condemned
Iran’s move as
“significant escalation”
and
said Iran will face
"severe consequences"
The Pentagon
shared
that two US Arleigh Burke-class destroyers in the area had fired interceptors to help defend Israel against the attack, which it assessed was twice the size of Iran’s April attack (after Israel hit Iran’s consulate in Damascus)
And
State
declared
(yet again) it’s still looking to reach a ceasefire in Gaza in an attempt to defuse the wider regional conflict.
Capiche?
Later in the afternoon, the IRGC
claimed
90% of Iran’s missiles hit their military targets. And while
footage
shows multiple Iranian missiles hitting Israeli territory (including near Mossad HQ outside Tel Aviv, and towards two air bases in the Negev), Israel
says
“the majority of the incoming missiles were intercepted”
.
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
So what next? Allow us to paint you a picture with three words.
First,
escalation
: Iran’s new foreign minister (Abbas Araghchi) has now
declared
“
our action is concluded
”. But Iran tried that same ‘
no backsies
’ line in April, and here we are. Meanwhile, Israel earlier described its strategy as “
de-escalation through escalation
”. Ie, it was betting that by ramping up, its enemies might back down. And yet here we are.
Second,
isolation
: Iran’s UN mission has
tweeted
that “
regional states and the Zionists’ supporters are advised to part ways with the regime
” [Israel], in an attempt to further isolate Israel abroad. But Netanyahu just went straight for the jugular,
addressing
the Iranian people directly in an attempt to further isolate the regime
at home
.
And third,
momentum
: Netanyahu
used
this word over the weekend, declaring that “
Israel has momentum; we are winning.
” Meanwhile, his approval numbers are rebounding, his majority in the Knesset is growing (with some hawkish
additions
), and there are now
calls
(for example) to “
change the face of the Middle East
”.
The above three words combined, days out from the October 7 anniversary, a month out from the US election, and with a staggering amount of US firepower in the region?
It’d be a bold team of ex-diplomats to forecast Netanyahu hitting pause at this point. His officials are already
hinting
Iran’s oil infrastructure and other “
strategic sites
” will be next.
Also worth noting:
The sole casualty in this latest round appears to have been a Palestinian man hit by Iranian shrapnel in the West Bank. Around the same time, an apparent terrorist attack left at least seven people dead in the Jaffa area of Tel Aviv.
The Jewish high holiday of Rosh Hashanah begins today (Wednesday) and many Israelis would ordinarily unplug until Yom Kippur ends on October 12.
There are reports the IRGC didn’t give a heads-up to Iran’s new president until moments before it pulled the trigger. This could just reflect the fact that the IRGC answers directly to Iran’s supreme leader rather than the president; it could also reflect the extent of internal divisions now playing out in Tehran.
A MESSAGE FROM THE DAILY UPSIDE
Join over 1M+ investors who choose clarity over clickbait
Curious about the latest in finance, economics, and global business? We’ve got the answer:
The Daily Upside.
This fresh, insightful newsletter, created by a team of Wall Street insiders and bankers, delivers deeply valuable insights that go beyond the headlines.
The best part?
It’s completely free. We read it every morning, and you should too.
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇨🇳
China
: The Chinese Communist Party has celebrated the
75th anniversary
of the People’s Republic of China in a notably low-key way, likely seeking to avoid flashy displays while China’s people endure financial strain. Instead, President Xi Jinping gave a speech warning his people that “
the road ahead will not be smooth
”.
🇮🇪
Ireland
: The local data protection watchdog has
fined Meta $100M
after the tech giant admitted storing user passwords on non-encrypted systems. Last year, the EU fined Meta over $1B for irregularities in its EU-US data transfers.
🇮🇩
Indonesia
: Swiss authorities have ramped up their
pressure on the family of president-elect Prabowo Subianto
, arguing his younger brother and confidant, tycoon Hashim Djojohadikusumo, owes Switzerland hundreds of millions in back taxes. It’s a bit awkward for Prabowo, whose inauguration is scheduled for October 20.
🇲🇽
Mexico
: Outgoing president Andrés Manuel López Obrador has enjoyed
a very ‘on brand’ final day in office
: he turned his 1,438th press briefing into a full variety show featuring breakfast, live music, and even raffling off his own watch. The left-leaning leader now retires with high approval ratings, but many citizens still worry at the populist constitutional changes he’s left behind.
🇨🇩
DR Congo
: The M23 rebel group is apparently making
$300K a month
from its control of the Rubaya area in eastern DRC, which provides 15% of the world’s tantalum (a rare metal used for certain electronics). The head of the UN mission in Congo has urged the UN Security Council to impose sanctions “
on those benefiting from this criminal trade
”.
EXTRA INTRIGUE
💼
The Intrigue job board is back!
Sales & distribution manager @
BBC
in Singapore
Cybersecurity architect @
BNP Paribas
in Milan
Insights manager @
RedBull
in Cape Town
Senior nutrition specialist @
International Rescue Committee
in London
RECORD OF THE DAY
Thousands breaking a world record at an Auckland stadium. Credits: Dj Mills/AFP/Getty Images.
New Zealand has retaken the world record for the biggest haka, after more than 6,000 Kiwis performed the traditional Māori custom at a stadium in Auckland over the weekend. We say ‘
re
taken’ because France actually yoinked the title back in 2014, much to the displeasure of the Kiwis who cherish the haka as part of their national heritage.
DAILY POLL
Are we near a de-escalation in the Middle East?
✅ Yes, Iran's volley did minimal damage
❌ No, Israel can't let that go unanswered
🤝 Maybe, it depends on... (tell us what!)
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
What should Ishiba focus on first?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
📈
The economy (60%)
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🔫
An 'Asian NATO' (26%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🤝
Mending domestic political ties (13%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (Write in!) (2%)
Your two cents:
📈
E.K.H:
“It's hard to do anything big abroad without shoring up support at home first, and that goes straight through people's pocketbooks.”
🔫
E.R.H:
“The biggest threat to any economy is rising geopolitical tensions. The ball has been rolling for a while in China - Japan will need to be prepared for when China moves.”
🤝
D.L:
“The LDP is facing unprecedented criticism; Ishiba needs to make sure the party is strong internally so that it can keep its influence in the Diet (Japan’s parliament) and elsewhere.”
✍️
M.S.M:
“The ageing population is a cliff due to its low birth rate. Japan needs more incentives on genuine family friendly policies.”