URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/iran-saudi-arabia-make-peace-china
Title: 🌍 Iran and Saudi Arabia make peace in China

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Political party names are always good for a chuckle, whether it’s Mexico’s '
Institutional Revolutionary Party’
(confusing but inclusive) or Turkey’s '
Good Party'
(virtuous
and
modest!). But, as always, they take it too far Down Under. Over the years, Australia has had the ‘
Surprise Party'
, the ‘
Party! Party! Party! Party'
and the '
Deadly Serious Party'
. What we're saying is... democracy is the least funny form of government, except for all the rest.
Today’s edition is a 5.0 min read:
🇮🇷
Iran
buries the hatchet with Saudi Arabia in China.
🌍
Africa
's diaspora senses opportunity back home.
➕ Plus:
Iran’s nuclear program reaches a crisis point, how the papers are covering South Korean President Yoon's upcoming trip to Japan, and some Oscar-themed laughs for your Monday.
On today’s Intrigue Outloud:
Go deeper on the recent turmoil in Georgia, and China's historic mending of fences between Iran and Saudi Arabia.
🎧 Intrigue Outloud
- Valentina, Ethan & Jeremy
🗺️ AROUND THE WORLD
🇦🇫
Afghanistan
: An Islamic State offshoot in Afghanistan (ISK) has
claimed responsibility for a bombing
in the northern Balkh province that killed the region’s Taliban governor on Thursday. The Taliban has conducted several raids targeting ISK militants recently.
🇫🇷
France
: The Senate voted in favour of President Macron’s plan to increase the
retirement age from 62 to 64
on Thursday. Protestors have rallied for months against the measure, which will now move to the National Assembly for final approval.
🇫🇲
Micronesia
: A letter from outgoing President David Panuelo
accusing China of engaging in “political warfare”
in the Pacific was leaked to the public on Friday. Panuelo said he was considering switching diplomatic ties from China to Taiwan.
🇺🇸
United States
: Days after confirming a meeting with Taiwanese President Tsai Ing-wen, US House Speaker
Kevin McCarthy turned down
an offer from Ukrainian President Zelensky to visit Kyiv. McCarthy has expressed concern about Ukraine’s use of US aid.
🇲🇱
Mali
: The ruling junta has
delayed a constitutional referendum
that was designed to hasten the country’s return to civilian rule. The junta promises it'll still hold elections in February of next year.
🕊️ MIDDLE EAST | PEACE
The Saudis and Iranians break bread in Beijing
Briefly
: In a
surprise announcement
on Friday, long-time rivals Saudi Arabia and Iran agreed to re-establish diplomatic ties. The deal was brokered by (and unveiled in) China.
Some context
: The Saudis broke off ties in 2016 after protestors ransacked Saudi diplomatic posts in Iran. But the rivalry goes back decades and has been getting messier: proxy wars in the region, a drone attack on the Saudi oil industry, Iran's nuclear program... the list is longer than an Oscars acceptance speech.
So why'd they do this deal?
🇮🇷 After years of isolation and crippling US sanctions,
Iran
desperately needed the kind of legitimacy and solidarity that only China could offer.
🇸🇦 The
Saudis
wanted to hedge their bets and show Washington that they've got other options, after years of tension with their US allies.
🇨🇳 The world's largest oil importer needed stability in the world's key oil region. Plus,
China
wanted to show that it's a global power, like the US.
Intrigue's take
: Peace is good, no matter the broker. But the details can reveal broader trends. In this case, three things come to mind:
First, it was novel to see such an historic deal happen without the US in the room. And yet...
the US
was
in the room
by clearly being on the mind of each signatory.
Second, energy independence has freed the US to focus elsewhere (eg, Ukraine, East Asia). But
a major oil importer like China is still tied to the Middle East
,
so it’ll only get more involved in the region. And that's no fun (just ask the US).
And third,
Iran and Saudi still loathe each other
. This deal is less about them burying the hatchet, and more about them hedging against the US and courting China.
Make no mistake, this is a big deal; it’s just more nuanced than it seems.
Also worth noting
:
The
2019 drone attack on Saudi oil facilities
drove global oil prices up 20% in a single weekend, the largest single spike since the 1970s.
UK intelligence says it’s foiled
15 attempted assassinations and kidnappings
against Iran’s enemies in the UK, including journalists.
📰 GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES
How different newspapers covered:
South Korean President Yoon Suk-yeol‘s upcoming trip to Japan.
Links:
Korea Times
,
Japan Times
,
Inquirer.Net
Sponsored by
Notion
Over 20 million people and hundreds of thousands of teams around the world use Notion to organize their work and get more done.
Notion is the all-in-one workspace that combines notes, docs, project management, and wikis - and makes them all customizable. Over 20 million people and teams around the world use it to collaborate, stay informed, and get more done together.
Subscribe for free.
🌍 AFRICA | DIASPORA
Insights on Africa from our friend Caleb at
Tech Safari
There's a country with 150 million people. It's the 10th largest in the world. In fact, it's so big, the African Union even declared it Africa's sixth region. And yet... it's not a country. It's Africa's diaspora: folks with origins in Africa, now living abroad.
And it’s not just population size
. The single largest financier in all of Africa is the diaspora, sending back
$53 billion in remittances
(ie, sending money home) in 2022. For six African nations, remittances made up more than 10% of their GDP. In Gambia, it was 28%.
But
Africa’s diaspora has unique problems
(beyond strict migrant parents!). Migration is a long process. Banking and credit can be tough to access abroad. And even when you’re settled, a new set of challenges emerges: sending money home, caring for family, finding your community and connecting with your culture.
But where there's problems to solve and cash to spend, there's
startups
. And Africa’s no exception. After minting its first unicorn in 2016, there are now a dozen across the continent. And many startups are now building specifically for Africa’s diaspora.
Africa's startup journey is just getting started.
Also worth noting
:
One startup is trying to build
a new country
for Africa’s diaspora - on the internet.
In January the Ghanaian government partnered with rappers Chance the Rapper and Vic Mensa on
Black Star Line - a festival for Africa’s Diaspora
. 50,000 people attended, including Black celebrities like Dave Chapelle and T-Pain. Check it out
here
.
We love Caleb's insights into Africa's tech scene. On Wednesday he'll be exploring some of the startups building for Africa's diaspora. So be sure to subscribe to
Tech Safari
and check it out.
💬 QUOTE OF THE DAY
Are Iran and the West inching towards war?
Iran watcher Ellie Geramayeh thinks they might be. Check out Friday’s episode of
Intrigue Outloud
on
Spotify
,
Apple Podcasts
, or
wherever
, to hear why Ellie’s worried and why engagement is in everyone’s best interest.
👀 EXTRA INTRIGUE
In honour of the Oscars over the weekend, here’s a roundup of Hollywood-themed tales to start the week with a smile. Or not. We won’t tell you what to do.
After the surprise success of
Cocaine Bear
, get ready for
cocaine wildcat
. Thankfully, the feline is doing well. Maybe a little
too
well.
Oscar nominees have been
gifted a square metre of Australian land
they can’t actually use.
A fungi-killing compound, keanumycins, has been
named after Keanu Reeves
.
Inflatable HIMARS vehicles
are the next big thing in fake army equipment. It's only a matter of time before there's a movie about an inflatable arms dealer (i.e. the weapons are inflatable, not the dealer).
🗳️ POLL TIME!
Are you satisfied with the weekend's Oscar winners?
🎞️ Yes, for once I agree with the Academy
🎥 No, and I feel strongly about it
🎬 Only partially, [...] was robbed (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Friday's poll:
Do you think the days are numbered for Georgia's current government?
🟩🟩🟩🟩🟩🟩 ⏰ Yes, the people are angry and want to join the EU (77%)
🟨⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✋ No, the government can still balance the EU and Russia (23%)
Your two cents:
⏰
S:
"The government may fall but Georgia will not be allowed by Putin to enter the EU. If you think there's growing fatigue in supporting Ukraine against Russia wait till you see the apathy in supporting Georgia."
✋
J.L:
"More than 'balancing', Tbilisi's government can simply wait out the protests. It's all up to Ivanishvili."