URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/iran-launches-firstever-direct-attack-israel
Title: 🌍 Iran launches first-ever direct attack on Israel

IN TODAY’S EDITION
1️⃣ Israel vows answer to Iran’s historic attack
2️⃣ Is the world getting tighter?
3️⃣ How to get fired at a German art gallery
Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
One way to describe
Iran’s historic attack on Israel
yesterday (our lead story) is to say it was “
performative
”. I.e, it was calibrated to send a message rather than cause damage.
That may be right, though here’s a question: did Iran’s 350 missiles and drones do such little damage because Iran gave everyone a heads-up? Or was it because Israeli and allied air defences were superior? Or was it because half of Iran’s ballistic missiles ended up failing? The answer, of course, is all three.
But enough from me. Let’s dive in, shall we?
PS - Do you live around DC?
Join us
for a chat with spy-turned-author
Jack Beaumont
on Wednesday April 24th!
THE HEADLINES
Scholz in China.
German Chancellor Olaf Scholz
travelled to China
over the weekend, accompanied by a delegation of executives from Mercedes, BMW and other firms. The German leader reiterated concerns about China’s unfair competition, which were reportedly dismissed as “
fake questions
” by the Chinese side. US Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen delivered a similar message to China a week ago.
The ‘forgotten’ war.
Today (Monday)
marks a year
since fighting broke out between two rival factions in Sudan, displacing some 8.5 million people. A distracted international community has met just 5% of the UN’s latest humanitarian appeal, so France is today hosting a conference to raise awareness (and funds).
Samsung regains top phone maker crown.
Apple iPhone shipments
dropped by around 10%
over the first quarter of the year, allowing Samsung to regain the top spot. The South Korean giant now accounts for almost 21% of the global market, while Apple - facing increased competition - now holds 17%.
Singapore PM to step down.
Singaporean Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong
will step down next month
, handing the reins to his deputy Lawrence Wong after two decades in power. The move comes ahead of general elections next year.
Trump ‘hush money’ trial kicks off.
Former US President
Donald Trump will appear in a New York courthouse today
, accused of 34 felony counts of falsifying business records in relation to a hush payment made to Stormy Daniels. He’s the first former US president to stand trial in a criminal case, which is expected to run for six to eight weeks.
TOP STORY
Iran launches first-ever direct attack on Israel
The trajectory of Iran’s weekend attacks. Credits: WSJ.
After three decades of shadow war and 13 days of foreshadowing, Iran launched its first-ever direct attack on Israel early on Sunday morning.
The attack - which comes after Israel’s recent airstrike on the Iranian embassy compound in Damascus - was unprecedented for its scale (350 projectiles), target (Israel directly), and source (Iran directly).
Iran also used
different weapons
(drones / cruise missiles / ballistic missiles); with
different speeds
(nine hours / two hours / 12 minutes to target); from
different sites
(mostly Iran, but also proxies in Yemen, Iraq and Syria).
The presumed aim was for them all to reach Israel
en masse
to overwhelm Israel's air defences. But most projectiles were still downed before even reaching Israel’s borders, thanks to:
Support from
allies
like the US, UK, and France
Iran's own
technical failings
(half its ~110 ballistic missiles failed), and
Intervention from
neighbours
like Jordan (a
statement
to placate domestic anti-Israel sentiment said Jordan only shot down drones in its airspace as "
self-defence”
rather than for the benefit of Israel).
Israel's
layered air defences
then handled most of the rest, with the ~16 minutes of action
reportedly
costing Israel an estimated $1B.
Seven of Iran's 110 ballistic missiles still made it through
, causing minor damage at Nevatim airbase, the main home for Israel's F35 fighter jets (which Iran blames for Israel’s earlier Damascus attack).
And throughout it all,
Iran's behaviour was interesting to watch
.
72 hours before launch, it started '
telegraphing
' its plans and then, with drones in the air, its UN mission
tweeted
that "
the matter can be deemed concluded
" (ie, ‘no backsies’). After impact, Iran's president and others went on to
warn
Israel to just leave it, or face more attacks.
Why?
Iran was likely looking for that elusive sweet spot in its
shifting Venn diagram
of a) satisfying its own domestic pressure to respond to Israel, b) maintaining credibility in the broader region, and yet probably also c) assuming few projectiles would actually hit Israel, narrowing Israel's justification to hit back.
And the
world's responses have been intriguing
, mostly mixing condemnation of Iran with an urging of Israel not to escalate things further. US officials are also describing the events as a major victory for Israel, likely seeking to give Netanyahu political space to just "
take the win
".
But
Israel's leaders are seeing it differently
, with key hardliners in Netanyahu's threadbare coalition saying Israel should respond with a "
crushing attack
" that resonates “
for generations
”. So Netanyahu is again facing pressure abroad to show restraint, while facing pressure at home to go hard.
And that presents
Netanyahu with his own shifting Venn diagram
, seeking to a) respond to domestic pressures, b) maintain regional credibility, and c) retain international solidarity, without just d) bolstering the regime's support in Iran.
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
So this whole situation now looks like one giant Rubik’s cube of leverage, escalation, deterrence, and destabilisation. But have a think about who 'wins':
Israel
has now flexed two of its sources of power (air defence and alliances), and seen two of its vulnerabilities moved off the front pages (political instability and the humanitarian toll in Gaza), watching them both be replaced with a vivid global illustration of the very thing Israel has been warning about for decades: Iranian missiles over Israel.
Meanwhile,
Iran
claims it's now shown its resolve, flexed its ability to penetrate Israel's air defences, and perfectly calibrated it all (‘maximum symbolism, minimum damage’) to avoid escalation.
But ultimately, rather than deter Israel, Iran essentially gave it a much-needed moment of international solidarity.
That’s an Israeli win
. And yet Israel's leaders - fuelled by the historic sight of Iranian missiles over Jerusalem - will struggle to pocket that solidarity and heed the world’s calls for restraint.
That turns up the heat for the region, where everyone keeps saying they don't want a wider war, and yet everyone keeps crisscrossing the map with red lines: each intended to end the cycle, but all collectively raising the risk of accelerating it.
Also worth noting:
Shortly before launching its attack, Iran also
seized
a Portuguese-flagged cargo ship carrier in the Strait of Hormuz, claiming it was Israeli-owned. 20 sailors from the Philippines were on board.
Shrapnel from Iran’s attack on Israel critically injured a 10-year-old Arab-Israeli Bedouin girl in the Negev desert.
Hours after Iran’s attack, Hamas
reportedly
rejected the latest ceasefire proposal from mediators.
Following the weekend’s attacks, the US House Speaker now says he’ll “
try again
” to bring a stalled US military aid package to a vote, including support for Israel plus potentially Ukraine and US allies in Asia.
A MESSAGE FROM GROUND NEWS
Be informed, not instructed
See every side of the story with Ground News, a website and app that gathers articles from sources worldwide so readers can get diverse perspectives, compare coverage and stay fully informed.
For every breaking news story, instantly access every article published on it with context on each source’s political leaning, parent company funding it and how reliable their reporting is.
Learn more.
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇨🇳
China
: The third-highest ranking member of China’s Communist Party has travelled to North Korea to
meet the hermit state’s leader
, Kim Jong-un. China’s official read-out offers little detail, though quotes Zhao Leji as saying the two neighbours have long been “
good neighbours and struggled together”
.
🇩🇪
Germany
: Chancellor Olaf Scholz has announced he’s sending a
Patriot air defence system
and additional missiles to Ukraine, but is still holding out on sharing Germany’s highly-coveted Taurus missiles. The decision follows a call on Saturday between the Chancellor and Ukrainian President Zelensky focusing on recent Russian airstrikes.
🇮🇩
Indonesia
: Jakarta has denied using
air strikes in West Papua
against a secessionist armed group, after a New Zealand pilot being held captive by the group appeared in a video accusing the Indonesian military of making his situation unsafe. The Kiwi pilot was taken hostage by the West Papua National Liberation Army early last year.
🇨🇱
Chile
: Chilean authorities have announced plans to seek the
extradition of two Venezuelans
suspected of playing a part in the murder of a political dissident.
Ronald Ojeda, a former military lieutenant and Venezuelan dissident, was murdered in Chile in February.
🇳🇪
Niger
: Russian
military instructors
have arrived in Niger as part of a security agreement between Moscow and Niger’s military junta. Since the army overthrew President Mohamed Bazoum last year, the country has cut military and diplomatic ties with France and has withdrawn from a military agreement with the US.
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Your weekly roundup of the world’s lighter news
Norway’s Arctic region is asking the EU Commission to approve the establishment of a time zone with
26-hour days
.
The French parliament has declared that cows mooing at night
cannot be considered a noise complaint
.
A German art gallery has fired its employee after
he hung up his own artwork
to jumpstart his career.
A
house was seen floating
across the San Francisco Bay last week.
Chechnya has
banned dance music
that’s too fast or too slow, instead insisting that any music must “
conform to the Chechen mentality and sense of rhythm
”.
CHART OF THE DAY
Credits: Statista.
In 1970, the UN endorsed
a call
for wealthier countries to give 0.7% of their national income in aid, with a view to hitting that target by 1980. As of 2023, only five members of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), considered a club of wealthier nations, reached the target.
DAILY POLL
Where do you see things headed between Israel and Iran?
🕴️ Now that they've evened out the score, they'll return to their shadow war
🔥 They've now crossed the point of no return, and things could get ugly
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Last Thursday’s poll:
Do you see a real risk of war spreading in our world?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🔥
Yep - the ingredients are there (64%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️ ⛰️ It'll be a bumpy few years, but the world won't make this mistake again (32%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✌️ Chill - it's just a beat-up by folks selling guns and newspapers (4%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!)  (1%)
Your two cents:
🔥
E:
“Large-scale peace has historically been the exception not the norm.”
🔥
B.J:
“The elements are there. World leaders tend to include some individuals with big egos that make them focused on their own survival at any cost, insensitive to obvious dynamics, and surrounded by people who are forced to agree with them (or pay the consequences). Sometimes, it takes just a few key people like that to do something ill-advised that escalates a situation to the point where countries have to respond.”
⛰️ C.O.N:
“We all lose the next one and no economy would be left unscathed.”
✍️
N.J:
“If you look beyond the headlines there already is war all over the planet. Fortunately each has stayed "local" mostly. But Sudan, South Sudan, much of western Africa, Myanmar, China- India, Korea-Korea are all ongoing conflicts.”
✏️ Corrections Corner
Thanks to the Intriguers who pointed out (from Friday’s edition) that Saudi Arabia’s megaproject is called
Neom
(not Neon).
Was this forwarded to you? We're a team of ex-diplomats producing a concise and engaging geopolitical briefing for 85k+ leaders each day.
It’s free to subscribe
.