URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/iran-in-six-questions
Title: 🌍 Iran in six questions

Today’s briefing:
— Iran in six questions
— DJ’s intriguing side-hustle
— Our favourite diplomats
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Several Intriguers got caught up in the weekend’s chaos, whether rushing into bomb shelters or dodging Iranian drones.
It’s a reminder our wild new world might be less something to ponder via our smartphone, and more something we glimpse out the window.
Anyway, let’s get you
the six big questions from this latest hit on Iran
.
Number of the day
3,400+
That’s how many flights have been cancelled across seven Middle Eastern hubs amid ongoing Iranian retaliation, in the worst travel disruption since Covid-19.
Supreme loss
In the end, maybe the surprise came not in the attack, but the details, whether…
the CIA tracking Iran's supreme leader for months
pinpointing the exact time and location of his big all-hands, or
handing that intel off to Israel to pull the trigger around 9.40am Saturday.
The result?
Israel's opening strike alone wiped out a veritable LinkedIn of names: not just the supreme leader (Khamenei), but also his revolutionary guard boss (Pakpour), defence minister (Nasirzadeh), military chief of staff (Mousavi), and later Ahmadinejad (of "
Israel is a cancerous tumour
" fame).
All while the US focused on capability, hitting missile sites, comms centres, and naval assets (it’s investigating who is behind the deadly strike on a girls’ school in southern Iran).
So with the months of
will-he-won't-he
now giving way to
oh-he-just-did
, here are
the six big questions now worth your time
, starting with...
First, why now?
Kudos to whoever suggested maybe the Pentagon had to act before its Claude subscription expired, but this was realistically linked to the…
a)
talks
: the Iranians offered big nuclear cuts, but still quibbled on some details (enrichment at home vs abroad) and held firm on others (ballistics, proxies)
b)
balance
: the mass US footprint vs the ebb of Iran's grip and proxies, and
c)
deadline
: the bombs fell just as Trump's latest 10-day deadline expired.
So throw in the window of the ayatollah's big Saturday meeting, plus maybe a few US pressures at home (tariffs, midterms), and it’s on.
Second, was it legal?
No
, but the mere debate now highlights its own irrelevance in major decisions, so we include it here as an excuse to cite Germany's Merz, who just argued, "
international law too often benefits dictators, enabling their brutality while handcuffing democracies
".
If you’ll excuse the comparison, it’s almost a modern version of the 1st-century’s “
law was made for man, not man for the law
” in how it inverts the point. Several democracies (from Canada to Australia) were quick to endorse the hits, and might adopt that justification.
Third, what's Trump’s endgame?
Trump wants
regime change
. The murkier bit is how. And while there've been critics warning of some kind of Iraq 2.0 ahead, the
first
Iraq war (or even Venezuela) seems a better analogy: there's zero talk of occupation here, but rather a degradation of Iranian forces until someone better emerges, whether via succession, coup, or uprising.
So this is almost an
assassination masquerading as war
. Regime change was impossible with the ayatollah in power, and maybe it's possible with him gone. To be clear, nobody knows, and some of the "
Delcys
" Trump had in mind are now dead — but he seems to have calculated that the opportunity still outweighs the uncertainty.
Fourth, what's Iran's endgame?
By retaliating with hits on US allies and partners across the region — not just US bases but also luxury hotels and airports — it's a classic asymmetric response aimed at...
ratcheting
up the costs on US enablers in hopes they'll force a US backdown
demonstrating
the regime’s reach, and
distracting
the US and Israel while Iran’s rulers regroup.
But while the strategy seems
calibrated
(it didn’t hit NATO member Turkey, for example) and is
overwhelming
some air defence systems, it might also be
ill-conceived
(Trump isn’t exactly known for prioritising allied wellbeing), if not actively now
backfiring
: achieving the impossible, virtually the entire Arab world is now
united
… against Iran.
Fifth, the winners and losers?
A dictator who spent decades pledging death to Israel/America just got death
by
Israel/America, and the cold reality is this means
another win for US and Israeli deterrence
.
Meanwhile, it's
a loss for Moscow and Beijing
: they’re not Iran's formal 'allies', so there's nothing surprising about them not lifting a finger, nor lacking a finger in the region to lift.
Rather, this is a broader hit to both
a
)
their brand
, which is now less “
join us as a US counterweight
”, and more “
we might buy your oil or drones but you're still on your own
”; and
b
)
their strategy
: partnering with pariahs to distract and dilute Western power makes sense until you start running out of pariahs. And…
Finally, what does this all mean for the markets?
The
aviation
ripples alone will be massive here: Gulf carriers (Emirates, Etihad, Qatar) funnel
almost half
of all Europe-Asia passenger traffic through hubs that are now closed.
The other big hit is to
oil
, though DC isn't tapping US strategic petroleum reserves for now, signalling confidence in US inventories and the low US reliance on the Gulf.
But Brent prices peaked up ~13% soon after the strikes, reaching
14-month highs
(~$82/barrel). And that's a reflection of the fact Iran's revolutionary guards are warning tankers not to enter the critical Strait of Hormuz.
So you've now got ~150 tankers waiting outside, plus several major exporters stuck back
inside
(Iraq, Kuwait, Qatar, plus partially the Saudis and Emiratis) — together with Iran, that's now ~20% of global oil supply on pause.
Intrigue’s Take
There's no question Iran's regime is odious. The debate is more around whether this is the best way to deal with it. And maybe one reason this debate is now so rancorous is we've just seen an arguably progressive step (ousting a misogynistic bigot like Khamenei) delivered by modern DC’s least progressive POTUS.
Anyway, the gambler in chief has rolled his dice, and history will judge him by what comes next:
Worse-case scenario
, this power vacuum metastasises into regional chaos, and more misery for the jubilant folks whose name Trump invoked in pulling the trigger. Iran has already widened its target list, and Hezbollah has joined the fray. With missile interceptor stocks already running low in the region, maybe Trump declares victory and heads home while the region burns.
A better-case scenario
is perhaps a more pliant administration emerges or evolves, but that’s a black box right now. One of the main clerical names doing the rounds (Arafi) is just as hardline as his dead boss; ditto one of the main generals (Qaani).
Meanwhile, the old Voltaire/Mirabeau line comes to mind about Prussia being
an army with a state
, because it suits Iran right now. The regime’s own foreign minister just said as much, suggesting the revolutionary guards are hitting targets absent any direct orders!
And while the mullahs and generals are busy figuring out succession or hitting hotels, Iran's
ethnic minorities
will be wondering whether to wait for a new oppressor to emerge, or carve out their own space
now
: the Kurds (10%), Balochs (3%), Azeris (20%), and even Ahwazi Arabs (2%) already have their own varying separatist presence.
Anyway, while Trump is now running the risks, it’s the region that might bear the costs, and they’re all still downstream of one of the most catastrophic gambles in modern history: it was Yahya Sinwar (the Hamas chief in Gaza) who decided to attack Israelis on October 7th, hoping it'd trigger a war that'd vanquish the world's only Jewish state.
Instead, that move has now degraded his entire axis, with Iran's ayatollah joining the heads of Hamas, Hezbollah, and Assadist Syria in defeat.
Sound even smarter:
After months of tit-for-tat, Hezbollah has now launched missiles and drones at Israel in retaliation for the ayatollah’s death. Israel has responded with hits on Hezbollah-controlled areas in
Beirut
.
A suspected drone strike has hit the
British
RAF base in
Cyprus
, shortly after PM Starmer announced the US can use UK bases for airstrikes on Iranian missile sites.
And
Saudi Arabia
has halted operations at its vast Ras Tanura facility (~5% of global crude exports) as a result of a drone strike.
Today’s briefing is presented by…
Stop Drowning In AI Information Overload
Your inbox is flooded with newsletters. Your feed is chaos. Somewhere in that noise are the insights that could transform your work—but who has time to find them?
The Deep View solves this. We read everything, analyze what matters, and deliver only the intelligence you need. No duplicate stories, no filler content, no wasted time. Just the essential AI developments that impact your industry, explained clearly and concisely.
Replace hours of scattered reading
with five focused minutes. While others scramble to keep up, you'll stay ahead of developments that matter. 600,000+ professionals at top companies have already made this switch.
Join them today, for free.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇰🇬
KYRGYZSTAN
-
Take it to court.
Kyrgyzstan is warning it’ll take the EU to court if the bloc goes ahead with proposed sanctions that would curb the post-Soviet state’s access to certain dual-use goods. Brussels is accusing Kyrgyzstan of helping Russia skirt sanctions. (
TVP World
)
Comment
:
Kyrgyzstan’s imports of European high-priority items have surged 800% since Putin’s invasion, and no, that’s not a coincidence.
🇵🇰
PAKISTAN
-
Consulate protest.
At least 22 are dead and another 120 injured after pro-Iran protesters tried to storm the US consulate in Karachi yesterday (Sunday). (
NYT
$)
Comment:
Pro-Iran sentiment is more common in Pakistan’s Shia minority (15-20%). For its part, Islamabad has its hands full with its Afghanistan war, partly explaining why its response to neighbouring Iran has been to both
a
) condemn the US/Israeli strikes as unlawful, while also
b
) condemning Iran’s retaliatory hits across the Gulf.
🇧🇪
BELGIUM
-
The other war.
Belgium, with support from France, has seized a Russian shadow fleet tanker in the North Sea and escorted it to Zeebrugge. (
Euractiv
)
Comment:
This helps the Belgians push back on claims they were Putin-sympathetic when blocking EU moves to use seized Russian assets. It also exposes the limits of Putin’s threats — he’s responded the same way as last time (by doing nothing).
🇻🇳
VIETNAM
-
We’ll have what they’re having.
Vietnam has enacted the region’s first comprehensive AI law. It’s modelled after the EU's own AI Act, which mandates human oversight of generative AI and the labelling of AI-generated content.  (
The Straits Times
)
Comment:
This was always part of the strategy behind the EU’s sovereignty-via-standards approach — ie flex its regulatory muscle and hope others would follow.
🇧🇴
BOLIVIA
-
Flight risk.
A Bolivian air force C-130 carrying newly printed currency has crashed after veering off the runway near La Paz, leaving at least 15 dead and scattering banknotes across the area. Authorities are investigating the cause. (
AP
)
🇬🇭
GHANA
-
Entrenched.
On a trip to Kyiv, Ghana’s foreign minister has revealed at least 55 Ghanaians have been killed after being recruited into Russia’s war on Ukraine — it’s the most casualties officially confirmed by any single African country during this war. (
BBC
)
Extra Intrigue
🤣
Your weekly roundup of the world’s lighter news…
British authorities have
sent a techno DJ to prison
after he admitted selling more than 60,000 counterfeit aircraft parts.
Dunkin’ is trialling new
1.4L (48oz) buckets
of coffee in America’s northeast.
A software engineer has accidentally gained
control of 7,000 robot
vacuums after trying to control his own via a PS5 gamepad.
Meta’s head of AI safety has regretted letting an AI system
take control of her computer
after it started bulk-trashing her inbox.
And authorities have charged an LA cop with fraud after someone spotted him
skydiving while on disability
leave.
Account of the day
Credits: X
A quick shout-out to the French diplomats running the above account, which emerged last September as a way to push back on the hurricane of bozos and despots online.
Wielding the kind of sass we haven’t experienced since we tried ordering the
tête de veau sauce ravigote
in rusty French, this team is firing off zingers in real time, whether to…
dismiss claims about Europe being in a panic (
"Europe isn't panicking. Europe is just checking its hairline"
), or
mock Putin propaganda ("
Five years into its ‘three-day war’, Russia would really prefer you focus on French and British nukes.
")
Getting this kind of info-strategy right really depends on agility and risk-tolerance, neither of which are (ahem) famed strengths among foreign ministries. But our French friends have shown it’s not only possible, but also necessary and effective. Chapeau.
Today’s poll
Where do you think this Iran conflict ends?
🔥 More chaos
🙋 A more benign Iran
😠 A more hostile Iran
✍️ Other
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Last Thursday’s Poll:
What do you think is in Europe's best interest?
🇨🇳
Look East (6%)
🇺🇸
Stick with Washington (18%)
🇪🇺
Chart its own course (74%)
✍️ Other (Write us!) (2%)
Your two cents:
🇺🇸
J.F:
“Europe has been charting its own course for years and it's been a disaster. Even the expression ‘
European leadership
’ is a contradiction in terms.”
🇪🇺
M.R:
“Stick with Canada as it charts its own course, and make overtures to Mexico.”
🇪🇺
B.B:
“At some point, if you want to be a big boy you have to act like one.”
✍️ U.K:
“Do all, and see which one works best long-term.”