URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/reduced-size-template-7cb21154b7521f32
Title: 🌍 Iran in four numbers

Today’s briefing:
— Iran in four numbers
— Can you put
that
on a flag?
— How to skip mandatory training in Canada
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. There’s this classic true story about one of China’s ambassadors abroad inviting an entire Western embassy over for lunch. This was years ago when, you know, Beijing and the West might still do lunch.
On this particular occasion (and surely many others), Beijing’s ambassador made a big show of introducing his entire embassy team one-by-one, explaining in great and flowery detail what each diplomat did. His presumed hope was that our own ambassador might then feel obliged to follow suit and, by then skipping or stumbling over a colleague or two, then inadvertently offer clues to identify the embassy spies among his diplomats.
The correct response for any ambassador in that situation? Rather than tread out onto that tightrope, you just say thanks, we’re pleased to be here, pass the xiaolongbao.
Anyway, that story is on my mind today as we explore
the weekend’s latest Iran twists
, and how they could potentially come back to haunt us.
Number of the day
64%
That’s how much Mexico’s Monarch butterfly population just grew in a year, amid efforts to protect the endangered species. See? It’s not all bad.
Tick, tock…
Iran’s parliamentary speaker (Ghalibaf), and President Trump.
It's been a busy weekend on the Iran front, so here are the four numbers you need to know, starting with...
7.44pm
That's when President Trump's latest Iran
ultimatum
to re-open the Strait of Hormuz expires later tonight (Monday) DC time, or else the US starts hitting Iran's power plants.
That’s 11.44pm in London, 3.14am Tuesday in Tehran, and 10.44am in Sydney.
And we don't need to wait for any expiry to know
the regime's answer
: if the US damages Iran's power plants, Tehran
warns
it'll now take the entire region's power plants and oil assets down with it, while "
completely closing
" the Strait.
Iran's hard-line speaker (
Ghalibaf
) is even
extending
the threat to anyone financing the US military via treasury bonds. Iran has a history of idle threats, but fun fact: most of the world holds US treasury bonds.
Why
this face-off?
The regime
now sees its Hormuz strategy as not just...
a
)
effective
(jet fuel prices have ~doubled while key US arms stocks ~halve), but also...
b
)
existential
(any sign of weakness risks revolution or collapse).
And
for the US
, this situation now risks hurting not just...
a
)
its economy
(anything from the AI build-out to soybean output is now downstream of Hormuz), but also...
b)
its credibility
(the world's most-sanctioned regime can defy the US?).
So the two sides are now each hoping they can escalate to de-escalate, which takes us to...
Two
That's roughly how many days until the USS Tripoli enters Gulf waters with another ~2,200 Marines on board. The USS Boxer is another couple of weeks behind, bringing the Gulf's
amphibious Marine count
to ~4,500 troops by maybe April 10th.
And that 'amphibious' capability is key — it implies the possibility of, say, seizing Iran's
Kharg Island
(90% of its oil exports) and/or key stretches of Iran's vast Gulf coast.
If that's on the cards, maybe you get the US forcibly re-opening the Strait and de-fanging Iran's regime through April and beyond. Or maybe you get a quagmire with US forces stuck within regime drone, artillery, and missile range (see below). And speaking of which...
4,000km (2,500mi)
That's roughly the distance between Iran and the US-UK base of
Diego Garcia
in the middle of the Indian Ocean. And it's suddenly relevant because, to everyone's surprise, Iran’s regime fired two ballistic missiles at the base on Friday morning — one failed mid-flight, the other got intercepted by a US warship.
Why so surprising?
It's the longest-range attack ever attributed to Iran
It theoretically places major European capitals (London, Paris, Berlin) in range, and
It suggests the regime was
lying
(
😮
) about its lower 2,000km self-limit.
And...
why's that matter?
Capitals are still processing the implications, but
first
, DC will cite it as
vindication
for its decision to hit in the first place — a secret conventional capability not only shows bad-faith, but also helps fend off foes while you build out that
nuclear
capability. And
second
, watch if this revelation of a possible Europe risk now boosts Europe's war engagement — was that the point of the leak?
Then finally...
$14B
That's the alleged windfall the regime now gets after DC granted a 30-day sanctions waiver for stranded Iranian oil — by theoretically flooding the market and crashing prices, Treasury Secretary Bessent
argues
it's
a
) to "
use Iranian barrels against Tehran
", and
b
) financial sanctions mean the regime will still struggle to actually access the funds anyway.
He frames the war as trading 50 days of higher prices for 50 years of no Iranian nukes.
But if the mullahs do get access (say, by going via the yuan), that’s starting to approach the sanctions relief Iran scored via the Obama-era
JCPOA
nuclear deal. And yet instead of offering concessions this time, the regime has just strangled a global economic artery.
Anyway, there you have it folks: with Marines now days away, Trump's deadline hours away, Europe suddenly a launch away, and the regime's bankruptcy a further $14B away, we're all going to escalate to de-escalate and see which gamble works first.
Intrigue’s Take
The first deployment of US combat troops to
Vietnam
started out as 3,500 Marines explicitly limited to defending a single base in 1965, freeing up South Vietnamese troops to fight the communists elsewhere. Fast forward
just three years
, and there were more than half a million US troops on the ground by late 1968.
That
150x ramp-up
was mostly the result of a chain of smaller decisions that each seemed rational at the time, often to
make the previous step ‘work’
: it’s hard to protect that base until you secure the surrounding countryside; it’s hard to secure that countryside until you stop the infiltration from the North; and it’s hard to stop that infiltration from the North until you backstop the South.
Throw in some Domino Theory, Cold War credibility, and a determination to avoid becoming the US president who "
lost Vietnam
”, and next thing you know, that targeted, defensive
US role has spiralled
into a decade-long, trillion-dollar war that’s left 58,000+ Americans dead and communists in complete control.
So what about today?
For DC, it might look like this: you can’t let an apocalyptic regime get nukes; you can’t enforce such a red-line with the regime still in power; you can’t dislodge the regime without it blocking Hormuz; you can’t re-open the Strait without pacifying Iran’s Gulf coast; you can’t pacify that coast without neutralising drone threats from further inland; all while you can’t win the mid-terms as the guy who lost to Iran.
Now, we’re not saying that’s all ahead. We’re more just peering through the fog of war to illustrate how a string of targeted decisions can still spiral into
strategic defeat
. In the meantime, DC’s hope will be that a combination of Israeli assassinations, US military pressure, and regional blowback helps halt that escalation ladder on its own terms.
Sound even smarter:
Attacks on civilian objects such as power infrastructure can be violations of the Geneva Conventions.
Stock markets in Hormuz-dependent Asia are again starting the week rough, with Japan’s Nikkei down 4.1% and South Korea's Kospi falling 6.5%.
Iranian missiles hit southern Israel over the weekend, injuring 180 people.
As the Gulf’s final pre-war LNG shipments approach their destinations, the FT is
reporting
a Gulf gas supply cliff is around 10 days away (for Pakistan, it’s four days). Meanwhile, Ukraine has hit Russia’s largest Western oil hub (Primorsk), in a presumed attempt to curb Putin’s ability to earn a windfall from Iran.
Today’s briefing is presented by…
Are You Ready to Actually Retire?
Knowing when to retire means knowing what it costs, how long your money needs to last, and where the income comes from.
When to Retire: A Quick and Easy Planning Guide
helps investors with $1,000,000 or more work through all of it.
Download your free guide.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇫🇷
FRANCE — Dress rehearsal.
France’s mayoral elections delivered wins across the political spectrum, with the left holding in Paris, Marseille, and Lyon, the populist-right winning in Nice and Perpignan, and President Macron’s centrists taking Bordeaux. (
EuroNews
)
Comment
: Local issues often dominate, but these results point to a competitive field ahead of France’s 2027 elections, with no single faction at the wheel.
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES — Aeroplane crash.
Authorities have closed New York’s LaGuardia Airport after an Air Canada Express jet from Montreal crashed into a firefighting vehicle, killing at least two. (
FlightRadar
)
🇦🇲
ARMENIA — Energy connects.
It turns out Armenia and Turkey quietly held energy minister talks earlier this month — a big deal for two historically hostile neighbours. (
EurasiaNet
)
Comment
: Armenia has traditionally relied on Iran and Russia for energy, but both sources now look vexed as the Armenians try to pivot West, while traditional foes Turkey and Azerbaijan maintain what is effectively an energy blockade.
🇭🇺
HUNGARY — Staged event?
According to The Washington Post, Russia’s SVR (its CIA) has proposed staging an assassination attempt against Prime Minister Orbán to stir his supporters ahead of next month’s critical elections. The same scoop alleges Orbán’s foreign minister has been briefing the Kremlin on internal EU talks for years. (
Washington Post
$)
Comment
: Given the stakes of Putin potentially losing his most sympathetic EU and NATO leader, you can expect this election to somehow get even dirtier. The centre-right opposition leader (Magyar) is citing the reports as evidence of treason, from next door in Austria, where he’s getting drug tests to disprove another smear attempt!
🇵🇭
PHILIPPINES — Dirty fuel.
Manila is allowing the use of dirtier petroleum products to shore up the country’s fuel supply amid the Iran energy crisis. Authorities are billing this as a precautionary measure and not a permanent rollback. (
Business Mirror
)
🇭🇹
HAITI — Going back home.
After two years, the Kenya-led multinational security mission to Haiti is now winding down to make way for a broader, UN-backed
Gang Suppression Force
. (
Miami Herald
)
Comment
:
The new mission is bigger, better-funded, and more intelligence-led, but only time will tell whether that’s enough to dislodge the armed gangs running Haiti. Haiti authorities have also reached out to
private mercenary groups
.
🇲🇬
MADAGASCAR — Are you lying?
Madagascar’s new-ish military leader (after last year’s Gen-Z protests) has decreed that new ministers have to take a lie detector test to root out corruption. (
Guardian
)
Comment
:
These polygraph tests are often ineffective, so it’s likely more about giving Randrianirina an excuse to ditch ministers he doesn’t like.
Extra Intrigue
🤣
Your weekly roundup of the world’s lighter news
A French navy sailor has
given away his aircraft carrier
’s location after logging his deck-top runs on Strava.
Travellers have found a real-life possum
hiding amongst the animal plushies
at a Tasmanian airport.
Authorities have caught a Canadian realtor
sending a family member
to impersonate him at a mandatory ethics course.
Scientists have found traces of
cocaine, caffeine, and ibuprofen in sharks
around the Bahamas.
And a small French town has gone viral because someone named Zielinski is now challenging the incumbent Hittler in
the race for mayor
.
Flag of the day
The flag of the Swiss canton of Bern.
We try to keep it very PG13 here at Intrigue because we want everyone to have a front row seat to whatever *gestures wildly*
this
is. But sometimes, the world forces our hand.
All that by way of awkward throat-clearing to let you know that the cantonal government of Bern in Switzerland has reiterated the bear on its flag is here to stay, red genitals and all.
The Bernese authorities felt the need to issue this clarification after a Swiss lawmaker questioned whether it might be more appropriate to
a
) remove the bear’s junk, and
b
) flip its orientation to have it look up to the right as a symbol of progress. Bern’s answer?
Nein
.
Intrigue rating
: 9.3/10…?
Today’s poll
Which previous conflict do you think holds the most useful lessons for today's war?
🇻🇳 Vietnam War
🚢 Tanker War
1️⃣ First Gulf War
2️⃣ Second Gulf War
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Which world leader do you think will emerge most strengthened by this Iran war?
🇺🇸
Donald Trump (10%)
🇷🇺
Vladimir Putin (36%)
🇮🇱
Bibi Netanyahu (13%)
🇪🇸
Pedro Sanchez (4%)
🇮🇷
Khamenei Jr (3%)
🇨🇳
Xi Jinping (34%)
✍️ Other (write us!) (1%)
Your two cents:
🇷🇺
I.H:
“Turns out you can wage war on a country without casus belli after all! And, Russia gets a much-needed boost to its coffers.”
🇨🇳
R.M:
“Xi Jinping's policy is the purest embodiment of the saying ‘
never interrupt when your opponent is making a mistake
’. They are scoring free victories on all fronts, even in soft power.”
🇮🇱
J.G:
“Netanyahu is riding high as an unstoppable force in the Middle and Near East. He is unconstrained.”