URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/azerbaijan-prepping-new-invasion
Title: 🌍  Is Azerbaijan prepping for a new invasion?

Today’s newsletter supported by:
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
There's a
New Mexico
in Australia, a
New Australia
in Paraguay, a
New Paraguay
in Colombia, and to complete the circle… there’s a
New Colombia
in Mexico. Maybe everyone should just chill?
Today’s briefing is a 4 min read:
⚔️
Is another war brewing in the
Caucasus
?
🛢️
Chevron
is still betting big on oil.
➕
Plus:
The World Bank talks defence, how the papers are covering the upcoming US visit by China’s foreign minister, and is the crypto winter over?
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇨🇳
China
: Beijing has opened a tax
investigation into Taiwanese tech manufacturer Foxconn
, one of China’s biggest employers and the single largest maker of iPhones worldwide. Foxconn founder Terry Gou is running for Taiwan’s presidency in January.
🇫🇷
France
: President Macron has
travelled to Israel
to meet Israeli President Isaac Herzog and Palestinian Authority leader Mahmoud Abbas. Macron expressed France’s solidarity with Israel and called for the “
decisive relaunch
”
of a genuine peace process
.
🇱🇰
Sri Lanka
: Colombo has approved
visa-free visits for citizens from six countries
including China, India, Russia and Japan. The idea is to boost the island’s ailing economy via tourism.
🇲🇽
Mexico
: A tropical storm has strengthened suddenly into the “catastrophic'“
Cat-5 Hurricane Otis
, expected to make landfall near Acapulco this morning (Wednesday). This would be the first major hurricane to hit the resort city, home to a million people.
🇹🇷
Turkey
: President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan has
submitted Sweden’s NATO accession bid to parliament
for ratification after months of uncertainty and negotiations. It remains unclear when exactly Turkish lawmakers will vote on the bill.
⚔️
Caucasus | Defence & Security
Azerbaijan may be seeking to connect its territory (orange)
Is Azerbaijan preparing to invade Armenia?
Thousands of Azerbaijani and Turkish soldiers participated in
military drills
this week in locations across Azerbaijan, including in the newly seized territory of Nagorno-Karabakh.
Azerbaijan
took Nagorno-Karabakh
in a lightning 24-hour offensive last month, decades after the majority-Armenian enclave unilaterally declared independence, and months after Baku imposed a total siege around it.
More than 100,000 resident ethnic Armenians have since
fled
to Armenia.
Now,
some warn
this week’s exercises
could be a prelude to further conquest. Expansionist politicians in Azerbaijan (including President Ilham Aliyev) have long eyed a land bridge to Nakhchivan, an exclave separated from the rest of Azerbaijan by Armenia’s 30km-wide Syunik Province.
So on Monday, the foreign ministers of Iran, Turkey and Russia met their Armenian and Azerbaijani counterparts for
peace talks
in Tehran,
“without the presence of foreigners”
(i.e., without US or EU officials).
Meanwhile, Western players like France have been selling Armenia additional military kit, while the US has conducted (small) drills with Armenian troops - all part of an effort to deter another Azerbaijani move.
Intrigue’s take:
Armenia is now isolated. It’s wedged between two foes (Azerbaijan and Turkey), its traditional security guarantor (Russia) is bogged down, and Western support for Armenia has seemed pretty symbolic to date.
An invasion could be unimaginably ugly. Yet regular readers will know by now: in this world of ours, we increasingly need to imagine the unimaginable.
Also worth noting:
The US and Europe have yet to issue sanctions on Azerbaijan for its seizure of Karabakh. There’s
speculation
this is partly due to Azerbaijan’s leverage as a major gas exporter.
📰
How newspapers covered…
The upcoming US visit by China’s foreign minister
Noida, India
“Chinese FM Wang Yi to visit US this week for high-level talks ahead of likely Biden-Xi meeting”
Beijing, China
“Wang’s trip to US ‘crucial’, to pave the way for higher-level of interactions”
Washington DC, US
“China’s top diplomat to visit D.C. amid tensions over South China Sea, Israel”
Today’s newsletter is supported by: DoorDash
Restaurants and more, delivered to your door
DoorDash is the ultimate solution for all your food delivery needs. Whether you're craving a late-night snack, a quick lunch, or a fancy dinner, DoorDash has you covered.
With a vast selection of local restaurants and a seamless ordering process, DoorDash is the perfect way to enjoy your favorite meals from the comfort of your own home. So sit back, relax, and let DoorDash do the work for you.
Click here!
🛢️ Chevron | Energy
Chevron acquires Guyana oil assets
Chevron, America’s second-largest oil company, has
announced
it’s buying fellow US producer Hess for a cool $53B, the biggest deal in Chevron history.
Where’s the international intrigue?
🛢️
This is yet
another
big bet
on oil
, shrugging off the International Energy Agency’s recent
forecasts
that peak oil is on the horizon
🤝
It’s another sign the sector is consolidating, as more players struggle with higher interest rates and lower economies of scale, and
🇬🇾
It’s
another
big bet on Guyana (where Hess has a stake), with the South American country discovering 11
billion
barrels of oil and gas in the past decade.
Intrigue’s take:
Every past energy transition has been slow, uneven and contested. And we’ve generally seen more of an energy
addition
rather than transition: oil and gas overtook coal six decades ago, yet coal consumption has since
tripled
.
We say this not to claim how the world ought to be, but as a reminder of how it is. Speaking of which, there’s
evidence
we don’t have a lot of time.
Also worth noting:
The IEA says about
$2.8T will be invested
in the global energy sector this year, with $1.7T going to clean tech and the remainder towards coal, oil and gas.
➕
Extra Intrigue
What we’re reading about cryptocurrency:
A Wild Few Minutes Drive Bitcoin Above $35,000 as ETF Excitement Starts to Thaw the Crypto Winter
Citing Hamas, the US Wants to Officially Treat Crypto Anonymity Services as Suspected Money Launderers
Tougher UK crypto regime sparks boom for compliance advisers
Bitcoin mining consumes more electricity than most countries, study suggests
🗳️ Poll time!
If you were the leader of your country, what % of GDP would you set apart for defence spending and why?
The global average is currently 2.2%.
1️⃣ 0%
2️⃣ 1-2%
3️⃣ 3-5%
4️⃣ 6-10%
5️⃣ >10%
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
💬
Quote of the day
World Bank President Ajay Banga dropped some knowledge at the
Future Investment Initiative
in Riyadh yesterday (Tuesday), and argued defence spending is now crowding out other global priorities. The
data
backs him up: total global defence spending increased by $2.2T to hit new records last year.
Yesterday’s poll:
Which infrastructure do you think is most vulnerable?
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
📱
Tech hardware (5%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️ 💻 Tech software (28%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
⚡ Energy (39%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🌉
Transport (2%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️
🚰
Water & sanitation (22%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!) (3%)
Your two cents
:
⚡
D:
“Without energy nothing else on this list functions.”
💻
Z.W.O:
“As an AppSec consultant I say that almost anything can be attacked via software. And it does happen every day, hour and minute.”