URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/is-asean-back
Title: 🌍 Is ASEAN back?

Today’s briefing:
— Is ASEAN back?
— Why Bangladeshis googled ‘Kathryn Bigelow’
— World’s wildest announcement
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Our WhatsApp group has been firing lately (you can join by sharing Intrigue with friends using your unique referral link down below).
One recent topic involved advice for expats beginning life in a new city, so I thought I’d share a couple of humble reflections from my own years abroad:
First, instead of waiting for an invite some place, just be the host.
And second, it’s easy to lose your head down in work, so don’t forget to look up.
Anyway, the first time I heard someone mention the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), it was followed by this very sassy quip: “
if ASEAN is the answer, I’m a little worried about your question
💅
”.
As today’s briefing on
the latest ASEAN summit
explores, maybe that’s changing?
Number of the day
92
That’s how old Paul Biya is, retaining his title as the world’s oldest head of state as he claims a contested eighth term as Cameroonian president, shrugging off deadly protests.
Diplomacy in the East
It’s hard to know which international forum gets the
least
done these days, but Southeast Asia’s main ASEAN bloc (
Association of Southeast Asian Nations)
might traditionally be right up (or down?) there.
To be fair, that’s partly by design, with its consensus-driven and non-interference vibes both somehow necessary to get such a kaleidoscopic group of 11 states turning up, yet also making any meaningful agreement pretty tricky.
This week’s ASEAN summit in Malaysia, however, has made a few more headlines than normal, and it’s worth taking a quick look at the
four reasons why
, starting with…
A new member!
Timor-Leste finally got a seat at the ASEAN table, and it’s a big deal for all involved:
Timor-Leste
now gets preferential access to ASEAN’s $3.8T economy, a critical step for what is now ASEAN’s smallest (pop 1.4 million), youngest (independence from Indonesia in 2002) and poorest ($1.4k per capita) member.
And for
ASEAN
itself, it caps off a 14-year process partly delayed by Timor’s own lack of readiness, but also a quiet lack of bloc consensus: Indonesia was onboard, but others fretted whether a new member would further dilute ASEAN’s cohesion.
Anyway, Timor-Leste passed hazing, making it ASEAN’s first new member since the 1990s, and its first since the bloc introduced formal membership criteria via its 2008 charter.
A missing member!
On the flip side,
Myanmar
’s leader (Hlaing) was again absent, for the simple reason he wasn’t invited. He and his fellow putschist generals have been barred since they signed then shrugged off ASEAN’s ‘
Five Point Consensus
’ on ending Myanmar’s civil war (basically calling on them to end the violence and start a political dialogue).
And with China and Russia now helping the junta regain turf, the generals have
little incentive to re-engage
with ASEAN now, particularly as the bloc quietly splinters: some nearer to Myanmar’s chaos (like Thailand) are breaking ranks with their own diplomacy, while others (like Vietnam) are calling for Myanmar’s rival armed groups to be included.
Meanwhile…
A new peace?
Donald Trump made an increasingly rare US presidential appearance at ASEAN, mostly to witness the
new Thailand-Cambodia peace accord
calling for
troop withdrawals, prisoner releases, and joint de-mining operations
along their contested frontier.
This deal was arguably less about ASEAN, and more a fading glimpse of Pax Americana in the region: the two warring neighbours hit pause after Trump personally intervened, threatening there’d be no US trade talks until their fighting ended. It worked in an immediate sense, but there’s widespread chatter that the underlying irritants will keep festering until the next flareup (Thailand has even been reluctant to call this a peace deal).
There’s one interesting ASEAN angle, however: the bloc will send observers to monitor the truce, which is a big deal for the traditionally
hands-off
ASEAN.
Anyway, to the extent this ASEAN summit has been more consequential than normal, plenty of credit must also go to…
A bold summit host!
Malaysia’s
Anwar Ibrahim
is not your average leader: he’s been on the scene for decades, knows the key players personally, and has happily thrown Malaysia’s weight around much more since finally taking his country’s top job in 2022.
It was Anwar who started pushing ASEAN harder on Myanmar, and it was even Anwar who brokered July’s initial Thailand-Cambodia ceasefire. Why? Any ego aside, he wants an ASEAN that moves past ‘non-interference’ towards
a new mantra of accountability
.
And so now, having just hosted possibly
ASEAN’s largest-ever summit
(with Australia’s Albanese, Brazil’s Lula, Canada’s Carney, South Africa’s Ramaphosa and others there), he hands the bloc’s revitalised reins to its 2026 hosts, the Philippines.
Intrigue’s Take
Like currency,
summits only have the value we give them
. So why’d this ASEAN summit seem more valuable than normal?
In addition to the above, it’s worth recalling that
ASEAN itself
is now home to a third of the world’s economic growth. So these distant leaders aren’t turning up to get the latest on the
ASEAN Medical Device Directive Common Submission Dossier Template
. Rather, these summits offer the perfect way to hit up a dynamic region’s leaders in a day.
For
the US and China
, of course, it also means not only hustling for influence in a region straddling critical maritime chokepoints, but even just engaging directly with each other: it was on ASEAN’s sidelines that the two rivals reportedly agreed the outlines for a trade de-escalation that Trump and Xi
might
announce in South Korea this Thursday (though a last-minute
Wang-Rubio call
suggests maybe it’s not done yet).
As for ASEAN itself, the block has consistently stuck to the “
we don’t have to choose
” mantra, which is arguably just a way of saying it rather likes the status quo of US-backed security and China-backed prosperity. Who doesn’t. But
some intriguing research
out of Singapore suggests that, whether the region’s capitals admit or even like it, several are indeed now starting to choose. And they’re seemingly choosing China.
Sound even smarter:
In line with other recent US trade deals, Malaysia also
reportedly
finalised transactional pledges to buy American Boeings, LNG, coal, and tech.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
First impressions.
Japan’s new PM (Takaichi) has welcomed President Trump to the Japan leg of his regional tour, with the two signing the world’s latest mining and rare earths pact. (
Japan Today
)
Comment
: Full marks to Japan’s diplomats who helped Takaichi nail her first impression, presenting the US leader with a gift combining two loves: not just a putter, but one used by Trump’s beloved late counterpart and golfing buddy, Shinzo Abe.
🇷🇺
RUSSIA
-
For sale.
Russia’s second-largest oil producer (Lukoil) has announced it’ll sell its international assets following recent US, UK, and EU sanctions. (
TVP World
)
Comment
: It’s further evidence the latest sanctions are hitting Russia where it hurts.
🇹🇹
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
-
Warship docked.
A US destroyer has now docked in Port of Spain ahead of exercises planned for Thursday, just as America’s largest-ever aircraft carrier (the USS Gerald R Ford) pivots to the region. While Venezuela’s Maduro continues to criticise the US build-up, Trinidad’s leader (Persad-Bissessar) remains a vocal backer. (
EuroNews
)
Comment:
We wrote about possible US regime change efforts in Venezuela
here
.
🇸🇩
SUDAN
-
RSF captures key city.
After besieging the western Darfur city of El Fasher for 18 months and leaving thousands of civilians dead, the notorious ‘RSF’ paramilitary now says it’s seized control of the military’s last stronghold in the area. The UN says it’s a “
terrifying
” situation, with a real risk of reprisals against the 250,000 civilians still there. (
CBC
)
🇯🇵
JAPAN
-
Stable launch.
A local startup has launched the first-ever yen-denominated stablecoin in the world’s third-largest forex market, in hopes of carving out a slice of the ~$300B global stablecoin sector (99% of which is still denominated in USD). (
Yahoo
)
🇱🇹
LITHUANIA
-
We’re done here.
Lithuania has finally closed its border with Russia-loyal Belarus after repeated balloon-smuggling attempts wreaked havoc on Lithuanian airports. Vilnius says they’re hybrid attacks, and is holding dictator Lukashenko responsible. (
Politico
)
Comment:
To the extent Lukashenko is turning a blind eye or worse, he’s likely calculated that a few balloons over NATO’s border won’t be enough to tank his tentative rapprochement with the White House.
🇮🇳
INDIA
-
Direct relationship.
Direct flights between India and China have resumed for the first time in five years, in the latest sign ties between the neighbouring giants might be thawing. They paused flights during Covid, but never resumed them after their infamous high-altitude melee in 2020 left dozens of soldiers dead. (
BBC
)
Comment:
These headlines will come and go, but they won’t change the underlying structural reality that these regional powers are still rivals with near-zero trust.
Extra Intrigue
Here’s what people around the world are googling
🇦🇺
Australians
googled ‘
email passwords
’ after the
Have I Been Pwned
website revealed a
new email breach
involving over 180 million accounts.
🇧🇩
Bangladeshi
film fans looked up US director ‘
Kathryn Bigelow
’, with
her new White House thriller (
House of Dynamite)
tracking the minutes after a nuke gets launched at the US.
And folks in
🇧🇪
Belgium
searched for updates on ‘
Jamaica
’, which is now in the path of
Category five hurricane Melissa
, the world’s strongest storm this year.
Announcement of the day
Credits: Albanian PM’s office.
We’ve seen our fair share of weird announcements (we’re looking at you, Tokyo’s 2021-era advice to avoid eye contact with monkeys).
But we still raised at least one eyebrow when Albania’s
artiste
prime minister Edi Rama declared his government’s AI minister (who is an AI chatbot) is… pregnant (?) with 83 children (??), including one for each ruling party lawmaker (???).
It was his way of announcing that select parliamentarians can now access AI assistants, though it prompted a confused opposition to throw plastic water bottles in protest.
So we guess, um, artificial congratulations are in order?
Today’s poll
Do you think ASEAN is back?
🔥 Yep, Southeast Asia is so hot right now
⛔ Nope, it still can't agree
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think Western officials are over-dramatising the China threat?
💥
Yes, it wins votes (34%)
🦅
No, they're still too cautious (64%)
✍️ Other (write in!)  (2%)
Your two cents:
🦅
J.M:
“One cannot over-dramatize China. China has their ‘
Monroe Doctrine
’ with which they are seeking hegemony over the South China Sea.”
💥
B.K:
“Americans often view China as vindictive as opposed to a fellow ambitious nation — competition should spur American development instead of focusing on attacking our opponent.”
✍️
X.F:
“Whether you like it or not, China is here to stay. The rivalry is real but at the same time, China wants the same for its people, just like the West. Maintaining dialogue with a rival will always beat open conflicts, especially in a nuclear world.”