URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/fi
Title: 🌍 Is Al Qaeda about to seize Mali?

Today’s briefing:
— Is Al Qaeda about to seize Mali?
— Those pirates are back
— Estonia’s big needle drop
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. You’ve probably seen the term ‘blockade’ a lot, but what does it actually entail?
Historically, blockades were a common component of established warfare, and often preceded or were part of a formal war declaration.
Under modern international law, a blockade is considered an act of war because it involves the use of military force by one state against another.
But what happens when it’s a blockade by a non-state actor on a nation state, as we’ll see in today’s
top story on Mali
? Let’s dive into all that and more.
Number of the day
~$1T
That’s roughly the size of Elon Musk’s newly approved Tesla pay package, the biggest in history if he delivers on targets like eight-folding Tesla’s market-cap over the next decade.
Extremism fuel
Quiet, reserved, sort of tired-looking, and “
nothing of the cold-blooded warrior persona
”.
That’s not our description of Keanu Reeves, but rather a
leaked US diplomatic cable’s
description of a guy called
Iyad Ag Ghali
back in 2007.
He’s gone from taking up arms for Gaddafi, jamming with a rock band (Tinariwen) that later won a Grammy, leading a Tuareg rebellion against Mali, and serving as a Malian diplomat in Jeddah, to now heading a jihadi movement on the outskirts of Mali’s capital.
That’s one of the
wildest LinkedIn profiles
you’ll ever see, so we’re gonna need a classic…
**
Record-scratch, sepia flash-back to…
**
After decades of French colonial rule, an independent Mali emerged from the 1960s, but kept grappling with inter-related divisions like…
Ethnicity
: nomadic Tuaregs up north versus sub-Saharan Bambara down south
Ideology
: southern nods to African socialism vs a northern dabble in Islamism
Governance
: corruption and oppression across various administrations, and
Politics
: centralising power and wealth down south, alienating folks up north
That’s all fuelled Mali’s ~five coups, with the last three (2012, 2020, and 2021) all at least partly reflecting disputes on how to handle a Tuareg rebellion brewing up north.
So against a backdrop of
rising anti-colonial sentiment
, Mali’s current leader (General Goïta) booted UN-backed French troops in 2022, pledging to instead go harder against the northern insurgency with help from a more ruthless and less conditional Russia.
And how’s that worked out?
Not well.
The Tuareg rebellion was actually a little less active by 2021, until village atrocities by the military and Russian mercenaries pushed more northern communities towards the various jihadi groups already capitalising on all the chaos, poverty, and resentment.
And that’s helped those extremist groups up their propaganda game and spread across Mali until
September
, when Ag Ghali’s group called
Jamaat Nusrat al Islam wal Muslimin
(
Support Group for Islam and Muslims, or JNIM
) got within a day of Mali’s capital, Bamako.
‘Support Group’ sounds like your grandma’s bridge game on Thursdays, but
JNIM
(pronounced jay-nim) is the result of a 2017 merger of several jihadi groups, and is now also active across Burkina Faso, Niger, Benin, Togo, and (as of last week) even Nigeria.
Describing itself as
Al-Qaeda’s West African branch
, JNIM has carried out terrorist attacks against a tourist resort near Mali’s capital, the French embassy in Burkina Faso, a passenger boat on the Niger River, plus various villages accused of not getting onboard.
And since September, it’s imposed a fuel blockade on landlocked Mali’s capital of Bamako.
But why squeeze the capital’s fuel supply rather than keep attacking?
It’s partly about
Retaliation
against the military’s unpopular rural fuel ban targeting JNIM
Consolidation
of its existing control elsewhere, and
Destabilisation
of the junta’s rule by framing it as incompetent and oppressive.
They’re hoping for a regime collapse or some kind of negotiated transfer, rather than roll the dice on an attempted urban war in a heavily-fortified city of three million.
So will JNIM win?
We already covered
how the junta itself rattled foreign mining investors last year. But now the fact foreign embassies are
evacuating
non-emergency diplomats reflects real fears Bamako could fall into JNIM hands.
And then what?
JNIM has been open about wanting to replace this regime with a strict Islamist state, though Ag Ghali himself has also given mixed messages over the years, and his team has been downplaying its Al Qaeda links in recent months. That’s led to speculation he might’ve learned lessons from Syria, where a fellow Al Qaeda affiliate ended up toppling the regime before moderating in a (successful) bid for international backing.
In the meantime, Bamako and the broader region holds its breath.
Intrigue’s Take
Two questions you might now hear:
first
, does this matter to the rest of the world?
And the reality is yes — history shows a worldview’s ascent in one place tends to embolden adherents elsewhere. So beyond the humanitarian implications, you can bet this’ll all rattle neighbours where JNIM already has a solid foothold, particularly Niger and Burkina Faso. Ditto, you can bet Al Qaeda’s comeback across the Sahel will inspire affiliates across the Middle East and beyond.
And a related
second
question: who else wins and loses here?
One of the biggest losers is
Russia
, given it rolled into town promising a tough Putinesque response. Instead, Mali now risks joining Syria as a demonstration of how brittle Russian support can be. It’s also tricky for neighbouring
Algeria
, which has often been conciliatory towards Tuareg movements in hopes of stabilising its frontier. But this particular jihadi strain, even if its backstory is a little more complex, will rattle the elites in Algeria like everywhere else.
Sound even smarter:
JNIM has extracted ransoms to finance its expansion, trading an Iranian and two Emirati hostages for tens of millions of euros plus tonnes of arms just last week.
The International Criminal Court has a
warrant
out for Ag Ghali on war crime allegations.
It’s unclear if any other capitals plan to get involved, though the US just spoke to Mali’s foreign minister and
flagged
“
greater cooperation
” ahead.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇷🇺
RUSSIA
-
Where’s Waldo?
Putin’s long-time foreign minister Sergei Lavrov was notably absent from a security council meeting on Wednesday, and no longer seems to be leading Russia’s G20 delegation to South Africa later this month. The
rumour
is Putin has side-lined him after his failed Rubio call derailed the planned Trump-Putin summit. (
Kommersant
🇷🇺
)
Comment
: Take these rumours with a quarry of salt, but Lavrov’s absence has still yet to be explained.
🇿🇦
SOUTH AFRICA
-
Mercenaries by mistake.
Authorities are promising an investigation into how 17 young South African men ended up as mercenaries in the middle of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, from where they’re now pleading for help to get home. (
TimesLive
)
Comment
: It’s unclear which side they’ve been mercenaries for, though President Ramaphosa says someone duped them with promises of lucrative employment, which matches the Putin playbook we’ve seen in Cuba, Nepal, India, and beyond.
🇰🇿
KAZAKHSTAN
-
Count us in.
With five Central Asian leaders in DC for their US summit this week, word is Kazakhstan will join the Abraham Accords. (
Times of Central Asia
)
Comment:
Kazakhstan has recognised Israel for 30+ years, but the White House hopes adding more Muslim-majority states to Trump’s landmark Arab-Israeli framework could help rebuild Israel’s legitimacy after the Hamas-Israel war.
🇳🇴
NORWAY
-
A kill switch for buses?
A top public transport operator in Norway has introduced stricter security after tests found its electric buses could be remotely accessed and potentially even shut down by their manufacturer in China. The bus-maker says the remote access is —like other automakers — just for maintenance and optimisation. (
Euronews
)
Comment:
The headlines hint at some kind of “world domination via bus fleets” plot. But while a bit of transport mayhem is always handy during conflict, this is really more about the world’s broader security questions around China’s tech.
🇯🇵
JAPAN
-
Asset slashing.
Local automaker Nissan is selling its Yokohama headquarters for upwards of $600M in its ongoing effort to survive. It’ll rent the building from the buyer. (
AP
)
Comment:
We covered
Nissan’s mounting woes
during the short-lived Honda merger talks earlier this year. With that lifeline gone, it’s time to sell the house.
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
Financial means.
The treasury department has issued fresh sanctions to close a money exchange loophole that Hezbollah has used to transfer $1B from Iran this year. (
US Treasury
)
Comment:
Despite massive military losses against Israel, Lebanon’s largest armed group is still limping on thanks largely to Tehran.
🇸🇴
SOMALIA
-
Pirates of the Indian Ocean.
Pirates armed with machine guns and RPGs have attacked and boarded a Greek-operated oil tanker off Somalia’s coast, with the crew now controlling the stationary ship from inside a fortified safe room. A Spanish warship is en route. (
SMN
)
Comment:
It’s the region’s first major pirate boarding of the year and comes after aggressive attempts over the past week, reviving fears of the kind of hijacking spree that disrupted global shipping a decade ago.
Extra Intrigue
Three stories we couldn’t shoehorn in this week
🥾
Money:
Warren Buffett (95) is passing his
annual letter
-writing duties to his successor (Greg Abel), after holding the pen for more than half a century.
Art:
The
Musée des Arts Décoratifs
in Paris has an
Orient Express mock-up
as part of a major Art Deco exhibition (please don’t steal anything).
Spirits:
Riding the non-alcoholic beverage wave, distillers in China are
trialling
milder versions of
baijiu
in hopes of attracting younger customers as well as officials spooked by the recent crackdown on boozy banquets.
Playlist of the day
Credits: Estonian Embassy in the UK
Why would Estonia’s women diplomats in London suddenly don fake moustaches and pull Blue Steels for the camera? It was a shout-out to the annual Melbourne-born
Movember
campaign raising global awareness and funds for men’s health.
Team Estonia also used the occasion to drop their latest Estonishly good
playlist
of homeland hits, with tunes like
Estonian Men
giving it all a Movember twist.
Have a listen.
Friday Quiz
Wednesday was World Tsunami Awareness Day.
1) Where did the biggest tsunami on record hit?
(as measured by run-up height)
USA
Indonesia
Japan
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) Tsunami is a Japanese word meaning...
Harbour wave
Retreating wave
Tall wave
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) What % of tsunamis occur in the Pacific Ocean's Ring of Fire?
39%
66%
78%
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate