URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/red-3867
Title: 🌍 Is Cuba next?

Today’s briefing:
— Is Cuba next?
— Spy vs spy
— China’s surprising viral trend
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. If there’s one thing that’s consistent about the Trump administration, it’s that its policy pivots keep everyone guessing.
We know a lot has happened since January this year — but if you cast your mind back to then, you may recall that the Trump administration had intensified its policy toward
Cuba
, aiming to severely restrict oil access to force regime change.
But as we’ll see in our top story for today, the administration has now
allowed a sanctioned Russian tanker
to deliver fuel to alleviate shortages, claiming no formal shift in US policy, but rather that it’s taking a case by case approach. Let’s dive in and see what that’s all about.
PS
— Thursday is our last briefing this week, but we’ll be back in your inbox next Tuesday!
Intrigue Insight: Iran war - day 32
On the battlefield…
US/Israeli
bunker-busters
seem to have struck a massive arms depot in Isfahan, while an Iranian drone has hit a loaded Kuwaiti tanker in Dubai’s anchorage zone.
Comment
:
Pentagon chief Pete Hegseth is making
an announcement
shortly. The timing (before US markets open, on the last day of Q1) suggests it might be ‘good news’, but the seniority (i.e., not the president) suggests it can’t be *that* good.
In the markets…
US gasoline prices
are now averaging above $4/gallon for the first time since 2022, while conflict jitters have erased nearly $12T in
global market cap
.
Comment
:
Meanwhile,
China’s pivotal jet fuel role
in Asia empowers it to
a
) deliver an easy soft power win versus a USA being blamed for the shortages,
b
) flex its foresight domestically in building historic reserves, and
c
) leverage shipments to reward friends and punish foes (though it’s mostly just vague statements so far).
Other:
US futures
jumped after The Wall Street Journal reported Trump telling aides he could be willing to declare victory and walk away, even with Hormuz blocked. That seemed to jive with his secretary of state (Rubio) now
shifting
the goalposts from regime change, nukes, and Hormuz, to instead destroying Iran’s
a
) air force,
b
) navy,
c
) arms factories, and
d
) most of its missile-launching capability.
Comment
:
At this point, we’re more inclined to watch Trump’s military build-up rather than these market-friendly leaks. In addition to pumping markets (though oil actually rose on the news), it could just be the kind of Trump ploy we’ve seen in Ukraine and elsewhere: create urgency and shift risk until others share more burden.
Havana bad time
When you’ve got a human headline in the White House, it’s hard to know where to look: take Friday, when the entire press corps almost stroked out over President Trump’s claims that the Saudi crown prince is kissing his cheeks (not the facial ones), while we quietly double-clicked on this bit:
"Cuba's next, by the way, but pretend I didn't say that please"
.
The Saudi stuff is domestic bravado (and the Gulf wields flattery as a tool), but
that Cuba line?
Just as Trump allows a sanctioned Russian tanker to break his own oil
blockade
on Cuba? Even though his blockade justification cites Cuba’s
“alignment”
with… Russia?
What — and we cannot stress this enough — is going on.
Here are
the four main theories
.
First
, Trump himself has framed it all as
a lifeline
for Cuba. And yes, the conditions in communist-ruled, US-embargoed Cuba are now dire amid blackouts that’ve shuttered schools, halted trash collection, and gutted tourism. Though… that was also the point: cause pain until the regime relents. And then if you’re going to let someone play saviour, why anoint the exact despot the embargo is meant to counter in the first place?
Second
, Trump has also argued it’s
no big deal
, and… he has a point here. Those 730,000 barrels would ordinarily sustain activity on the island for perhaps another 10 days or so.
Third
, maybe Trump just
TACOd
?
[glossary: TACO = Trump Always Chickens Out]
This theory posits that, with things getting messy in Iran, and a sanctioned Russian tanker steaming towards Cuba, maybe Trump just blinked: easier to let a tanker through rather than add another escalation to your in-tray. Though if (like Trump) you’ve already seized a half-dozen Russian tankers without Putin doing a thing, why not board a seventh?
Then…
fourth
, could this be linked to
US-Cuba talks
? Cuba’s Miguel Díaz-Canel started publicly acknowledging these talks after the year’s first mass blackout, so maybe Trump is greenlighting this Russian tanker to ease a little pressure as talks advance? The timing also aligns with Cuba’s release of 51 political prisoners due this week, not to mention word that America’s own embassy in Havana is struggling without oil. It all smells a bit like what diplomats might call ‘
confidence-building measures
’.
All four theories look plausible, though
US-Cuba talks
are the neatest
all-of-the-above
: loosen that noose just enough to avert a full collapse and ugly optics, while maintaining negotiating momentum just as Cuba holds up its end of an initial deal (prisoners). The main loose thread is why — of all the tankers across all the seven seas — Trump is using
this
tanker, under US sanctions, and flying the flag of the guy he’s supposedly thwarting.
And the bigger question is still…
what does the US ultimately want?
Secretary of State Rubio’s latest
remarks
pushed back on word DC might settle for an economic easing on the island, like a Venezuela 2.0: “
Who’s going to invest billions of dollars in a communist country run by incompetent communists? … Giving people economic and political freedom is important, but they come hand in hand. They come together.”
But if DC still wants regime change,
the dominant Castro family
is still there, whether it’s Fidel’s 41-year-old great-nephew reportedly leading the talks (Raul Rodríguez), or his other 55-year-old great nephew (Oscar Pérez-Oliva) who just got wheeled out to offer the latest olive branch: allowing Cuban emigres to invest in the island.
Meanwhile, last month’s
weird incident that left four Florida-based Cubans dead
suggests the regime doesn’t plan to surrender control without a fight.
So… maybe we’re just seeing hardball in public while talks proceed in private? Or maybe Trump’s “
Cuba is next
” suggests he’s really running out of patience, like he did with Venezuela? Or maybe — like a Saudi prince puckering up — it means nothing at all.
Intrigue’s Take
If you’ve ever visited Cuba, you’ll have stepped foot in the big
Plaza de la Revolución
, one of the world’s largest open squares, and the political and symbolic heart of today’s regime.
It’s dominated in the middle by a massive 109-metre (358ft), pre-Castro tower featuring Cuba’s independence martyr,
José Martí
— his 1895 battlefield death while trying to oust Spain’s colonialists has long reminded Cubans that freedom ain’t free.
Right behind him stands the plaza’s least ostentatious but most powerful building, the
communist party
HQ — a quiet reminder that in Cuba, real power moves in the shadows.
Opposite, you’ll see the famous 15-ton steel mural of
Che Guevara
, the photogenic face for the regime’s vast intelligence apparatus hiding in the interior ministry behind him — the spooks who’ll throw you in prison if you voice any dissent.
But maybe the plaza’s most revealing feature is also its least-known to outsiders: adorning the communications ministry, the same artist delivered another steel mural of Fidel’s young lieutenant,
Camilo Cienfuegos
. When delivering five-hour speeches (an authoritarian trademark), Fidel would famously seek encouragement from Camilo, who’d dutifully reply, “
vas bien, Fidel
” (you’re doing well!). It became such a slogan of blind loyalty to the supreme leader, the regime even added the words to the mural in 2009.
All that to say… whether this all ends in a controlled transition, another decade of managed decline, or some sudden bout of US impatience, the Castros are still entrenched in an authoritarian architecture that remains intact — and this prisoner release plus investment olive branch suggests they’re still negotiating survival on their own terms.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
Mode Mobile
What a $1.5B AI Settlement Really Means
Anthropic just agreed to a $1.5B settlement over allegations that it used copyrighted material to train its AI models.
This isn’t an isolated event. It’s a signal.
AI companies now face a new reality: data must be owned, licensed, or created at the source. And the most valuable asset in AI is no longer just compute or models.
It’s high-quality, first-party human data
.
That’s exactly where
Mode Mobile
is positioned. Mode already pays its users to engage, contribute, and generate data, with over $1B earned and saved by those users to date. Now, with Mode AI, that same network becomes a scalable source of first-party, permissioned training data.
No scraping. No legal gray areas. Just aligned incentives at scale. Mode’s EarnOS could become a massive, distributed data engine powering the next generation of AI, and you can invest today at $0.50 per share.
Secure your stake now and earn up to 20% bonus shares.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇫🇷
FRANCE — Japan trip!
Emmanuel Macron is joining every other Western 40-something making a trip to Japan this year, touching down in Tokyo today (Tuesday) for a three-day visit before heading to South Korea. (
NHK
)
Comment
:
Actively deepening ties with the two most capable US allies in Asia, he might be fleshing out his famous ‘strategic autonomy’ idea: building a bit of like-minded ballast amid a distracted US, an assertive China, and an aggressive Russia.
🇮🇱
ISRAEL — Death penalty.
The foreign ministers of France, the UK, and even Italy and Germany have issued a joint statement opposing Israel’s new
Death Penalty for Terrorists
law, which makes capital punishment the default for West Bank Palestinians convicted of lethal terror attacks. The text highlights the law’s “
de facto discriminatory character
” — ie, the way it applies almost exclusively to Palestinians rather than (say) Israeli settlers convicted of violent attacks. (
Italy’s foreign ministry
)
Comment
:
It’s a win for nationalist-right cabinet members like Ben-Gvir (NatSec) who’ve repeatedly threatened to rug-pull Netanyahu if he didn’t get the bill passed. Israel has had the death penalty on the books since 1948, yet only ever carried it out against one person: convicted Nazi war criminal, Adolf Eichmann.
🇹🇼
TAIWAN
-
Friendly visit.
China’s Xi Jinping has invited the leader of Taiwan’s Beijing-friendly Kuomintang opposition to China for the first such visit in over a decade. (
Taipei Times
)
Comment
:
The most interesting thing about this invite might be its timing: just as US senators visit Taiwan, and ahead of Trump’s own sit-down with Xi in May.
🇷🇺
RUSSIA
-
Persona non grata.
Russia has expelled another British diplomat on accusations of spying, a charge London has denied. We say “
another
” because the Russians booted another Brit in January, and two more last year (London has responded in kind). (
BBC
)
Comment
:
These two ol’ Cold War foes have been thinning out each other’s embassies for years — spying charges (true or not) are a low-cost way to curb a foe’s footprint and intimidate whatever’s left. Interestingly, the Russians emphasised this particular Brit was carrying out economic espionage via unofficial meetings with experts, hinting at the Kremlin’s sensitivity as wartime pressure on its economy grows.
🇮🇩
INDONESIA
-
Peacekeepers killed.
The UN has launched an investigation after unspecified “
indirect artillery fire
” killed at least three Indonesian peacekeepers deployed to Lebanon amid intensifying Israel-Hezbollah fighting. (
Independent
)
Comment
:
This might curb Jakarta’s enthusiasm to send peacekeepers to Gaza — something that’s been rumoured for months.
🇧🇷
BRAZIL
-
Crime and Punishment?
Amid lobbying by the sons of jailed former leader Jair Bolsonaro, the US is mulling whether to designate Brazil’s two largest drug gangs as terrorist groups. (
NYT
$)
Comment
:
Neighbouring Bolivia backs the idea, but Brazil itself is pushing back amid fears it could presage more US intervention. The bigger risk might be political ahead of Brazil’s October elections, with a tough-on-crime Bolsonaro son (Flavio) now favoured to win.
🇪🇬
EGYPT
-
New Arab League chair.
Former top Egyptian envoy Nabil Fahmy has emerged as the Arab League’s next secretary-general. (
Africa News
)
Comment
:
It’s unsurprising given the region’s main bloc has only ever had a single non-Egyptian leader, and that was to protest Egypt signing its 1979 peace treaty with Israel. Otherwise, Egypt has long dominated the Arab League as the bloc’s founder, host, and still its largest military power.
Extra Intrigue
What people around the world are googling
🇨🇦
Canadians
looked up ‘
US Canada border road closure
’ amid news the US will
close a Montana-Alberta border road
to Canadians, citing border security.
The
🇫🇷
French
searched for ‘
energy cheques 2026
’ ahead of a new round of
financial aid
aimed at reducing energy prices for the most vulnerable.
And folks in
🇳🇵
Nepal
googled ‘
government 100 point
’ as their new rapper-turned-prime-minister Balendra Shah unveiled his
roadmap for the nation
.
Trend of the day
While the West’s latest viral trend involves riffing off the news that someone yeeted 14 tonnes of KitKats (Globex Corporation getting in on the fun with tweets all like “
it wasn’t us hahaha!!!
”), China’s craze involves changing your profile pic to the Kardashian matriarch herself,
Kris Jenner
!
…Why? It seems folks see her as the ultimate symbol of success and prosperity, so switching that profile pic is a fun way to signal a bit of aspiration for the year ahead.
It’s also another example of the way the West and China can sometimes mirror what they see as the other’s best attributes: compare this Jenner craze with, say, the West’s ‘Chinamaxxing’ phase, with young netizens embracing customs like drinking warm water and wearing indoor slippers.
A beautiful form of cultural exchange: slippers for Jenners. Balance restored.
Today’s poll
Why do you think Trump let the Russian tanker through to Cuba?
⛑️ A humanitarian gesture
🤷 Because it's not a big deal
🚢 He TACO'd
💬 Part of US-Cuba talks
✍️ Other (write us!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think Trump will order a ground operation against Iran in the next 10 days?
🔥
Yes, the military buildup isn't for nothing (74%)
🙅
No, he's bluffing (23%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (3%)
Your two cents:
🔥
J:
“He is buying into the sunken cost fallacy because he can’t find a way out of his mess.”
✍️
D.V:
“Every prediction is a futile exercise, as I'm not quite sure the administration knows what it's doing each day.”