URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/red-69af
Title: 🌍 Is central bank independence over?

Today’s briefing:
— Is central bank independence over?
— Why South Africans are googling ‘UJ’
— World’s newest city
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. You might recall the other day I reflected on all the passive “
monitoring the situation
” jokes, only for the monitors-in-chief (the European Union) to then
confirm
they were indeed monitoring the situation in Iran.
But whatever exasperation I felt was soon replaced by delight when an insider told me that for central bankers, the preferred term is apparently “
standing ready
”.
And dear Intriguer, we are indeed standing ready — perhaps more ready than we’ve ever stood before — because today’s briefing is about the world’s
central bank independence
debate amid renewed pressure on the Fed chair, Jerome Powell.
PS
— Tomorrow (
Wednesday
) will be our last edition for the week before our quick team retreat, but we’ll be back in your inbox from Monday!
Number of the day
1,419 days
That’s how long Russia’s full-scale war on Ukraine has now lasted, a day longer than it took Soviet troops to reach Berlin in WWII.
Banking gone wild.
Jerome Powell has long given hope to lawyers everywhere. Yes, you too can pivot away from grinding billable hours through endless redlines to instead get rich in private equity before becoming the world’s most powerful central banker.
But even being a registered Republican (and Trump 1.0 appointee!) couldn’t save Powell from a new DoJ probe into his testimony over long-running Fed building renovations.
Powell is
defending
his honour, declaring
“this new threat is not about my testimony last June”,
but
“a consequence of the Federal Reserve setting interest rates”
based on data and not
“the preferences of the President.”
🔥
🔥
🔥
And quick rewind
, but we’ve seen this before. Way back in the groovy 1970s, Nixon was sitting on a costly Vietnam war, vast debt, and stubborn inflation, sending jitters among capitals still pegging their currency to the dollar — West Germany withdrew from Bretton Woods, and Paris even sent a gold ship to retrieve some of its reserves from New York!
Nixon, recognising the
Bretton Woods system
wasn’t sustainable atop dollar-gold convertibility, and eyeing a re-election campaign, abandoned gold convertibility while pressuring his own Fed chair to loosen the rates spigot and juice the economy.
He basically shifted the dollar’s value away from gold towards
trust in the US
instead: ie, trust that a US dollar would be worth something because of American
a
) stability,
b
) prosperity, and
c
) authority to declare the dollar as tender to raise taxes and repay debts.
A half century later, the US economy still soars (4.3% growth!) even as the US dollar has lost 99% of its value compared to gold, which just hit another record Monday. As we’ve done for millennia, we humans keep returning to
gold
for safety.
Now lava lamps aside,
some of those 1971 conditions exist today
whether across debt, defence spending, inflation, or even the way the world now sees and (dis)trusts DC.
Which brings us back to this Powell-Trump story: a quick spin through time and space offers cautionary tales around central bank independence — the semi-sacred idea that you should let central banks make decisions best for your economy, not your politics.
First
, on
currencies
: emerging markets offer the sharpest examples, though maybe also the trickiest to unpick from broader national volatility:
Turkey
’s Erdogan sacked three governors in two years until one finally agreed to lower rates into an inflationary environment, thus gutting the lira, evaporating household savings, and sending investors running for the exits, and
Argentina
’s Milei is still trying to clean up the mess after fiscal-monetary subordination (ie, the central bank doing what it’s told) unleashed a vicious cycle of inflation begetting depreciation begetting inflation.
But bottom line, if you were holding assets in the lira or the peso, you got burnt.
In the US context, keep in mind that many US economists
want
a weaker US dollar: Trump’s recent Fed nominee (Miran), for example, has argued the dollar’s reserve status means it’s persistently overvalued, driving US deindustrialisation.
Anyway, second, on
bonds
. Keep an eye on how Japan (the largest US bond-holder) reacts once back from holiday today, but
Brazil
is another interesting example: decades of on/off political pressure have entrenched inflation expectations that foster a debt-tolerant vibe — eg, it’s common to buy that $30 dress via instalments (
parcelados
) to lock in today’s price, then pay in tomorrow’s (weaker)
real
. But these short-term consumer wins reflect longer-term jitters, which become higher borrowing costs for Brazil.
Leading us to the core issue…
Third,
credibility
. Wall Street keeps telling its international clients to chill: their line during Trump 1.0 was “
nothing ever happens
”, but ask Maduro how that bet is working out. So the Street’s soothing lines are now
a
) it’ll be tough to prove Powell had any
intent
to lie;
b
) it’s just a ploy by Trump’s on-the-out attorney-general (Bondi) to keep her job; or just
c
) ultimately the Fed makes
committee
decisions, diluting any particular pressure on Powell.
Intrigue’s Take
There’s a classic if alarming quote attributed to Tony Blair’s former chief of staff, who’s now national security advisor to Keir Starmer: "
When you arrive in No 10 and pull on the levers of power, you discover they are not connected to anything.
"
He was reflecting on the difficulties for a party returning to power, but the line jives with some of the frustrations that keep
pole-vaulting populists into power
:
let’s ditch the red-tape and get stuff done!
Or specifically on central bank independence, it’s
how is an elected leader supposed to lead if they’re not even allowed to touch a core lever (rates)?!
This might have its own enticing logic in the short term, though if you want to nerd-out a little, UT Austin economist Carola Binder has published
research
drawing a pretty clear
link between political interference and higher inflation
/rates over the longer term.
Meanwhile, there’s a slow-burn story about dedollarisation in response, but it’s not always how it seems. Eg, Zambia is now allowing China’s miners to pay royalties in yuan, but that’s not about Zambia adopting the yuan, so much as China using its leverage to recycle yuan back home — where
else
is Zambia going to spend those yuan?
And speaking of China, this whole Fed situation poses
a tricky dilemma for the People’s Bank
: it’d be tempting to cheer on a weaker US dollar, but China itself is sitting on ~$3T in dollar reserves (mostly Treasuries), and it’ll be wary of any shocks to a dollar system still lubricating its export machine, let alone the pressure a weaker dollar puts on the yuan.
Anyway, for now, central bankers everywhere will still watch the Fed, but with two new questions: first, is any particular Fed move based on data, or a directive? And second, at what point do their own world leaders look at Trump and say
I’ll have what he’s having
?
Sound even smarter:
The USD share of global foreign reserves just hit a new low of 56.92%, though that mostly reflects exchange-rate dips rather than some sudden sell-off.
If you want to nerd-out,
Lords of Finance
is a Pulitzer-winning account of how four central bankers triggered the Great Depression.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇮🇷
IRAN
-
Trump hits with secondary tariffs.
President Trump has announced a 25% tariff on any countries doing business with Iran, as the regime’s violent crackdown continues. (
Financial Post
)
Comment
:
It’s nominally an attempt to squeeze a regime now responsible for deathtolls estimated well into the thousands (though they’re impossible to verify). But it'll hit Iran’s trading partners too — not just the nearby Turks and Emiratis, but Iran's top (oil) customer, China. Beijing likes the discounts, but also the way this Iranian revenue stream helps tie the US down far from Taiwan.
🇲🇲
MYANMAR
-
Top UN court opens genocide case.
The International Court of Justice has opened its first hearing into The Gambia’s claims that Myanmar's 2017 military operation (which drove 750,000 ethnic Rohingya into Bangladesh) breached the Genocide Convention. Myanmar’s military junta denies the charges. (
The Diplomat
)
🇯🇵
JAPAN
-
Rare mud.
Japan has launched the world’s first mission to extract rare-earth minerals from deep-sea mud, as part of efforts to reduce its reliance on China. (
mining.com
)
Comment
: It comes just a few days after China spectacularly banned the export of dual-use goods (including some minerals) to Japan amid their diplomatic spat.
🇩🇪
GERMANY
-
Souvenir from India.
Germany’s Merz has chosen India as his first Asia trip since taking office, signing a deal with Modi to deepen economic and security ties. (
AP
)
Comment
: The path to Delhi is a well-trodden one for any Western leader rattled by Trump 2.0 and needing to pivot away from China. European leaders are due in Delhi for an India-EU summit later this month, amid hopes Modi might now view the long-mooted EU-India trade deal as an answer to Trump’s tariffs.
🇳🇮
NICARAGUA
-
Freeing prisoners.
Nicaragua’s interior ministry has announced it’ll release dozens of political prisoners following US pressure. (
Independent
)
Comment
: All eyes are on Cuba as Trump’s next target, but Nicaragua’s Ortega family has (again) ruled Nicaragua since 2007, trampling institutions in parallel to (and financed by) Venezuela’s Chavistas. But with cheap Venezuelan oil drying up by 2019, and Maduro now behind US bars, the Ortegas will be feeling the burn.
🇸🇴
SOMALIA
-
Reschedule the visit.
China’s top diplomat Wang Yi has postponed a highly-anticipated visit to Somalia, blaming a “
complex security situation
”. (
SCMP
)
Comment
:
It’s a big blow for Somalia, which was hoping for more international backing since Israel’s recognition of the breakaway region of Somaliland — rumours continue to swirl that others will follow Israel’s lead.
🇮🇳
INDIA
-
Strike two.
India’s workhorse
Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle
has failed to reach orbit for the second time in a year (but just the third time since 1994). (
Bloomberg
$)
Comment
: India’s space agency hopes these are minor blips on the road to land astronauts on the moon by 2040, though that mission requires some big leaps.
Extra Intrigue
Here’s what people around the world are googling:
Folks in the
🇺🇸
US
looked up ‘
Golden Globes winners
’, as
Hamnet
and
One Battle
brought home the night’s two
Best Motion Picture awards
.
Netizens in
🇲🇾
Malaysia
googled ‘
university explosion
’ after an air-conditioning compressor
exploded at a private college
, leaving one dead.
And
🇿🇦
South Africans
searched for ‘
UJ
’ (the University of Johannesburg), which saw a
record-breaking number of applications
for 2026.
City of the day
How the founders envision Dunia Cyber City. Credits: Dunia Cyber City project.
Tech bros have all kinds of brohemian interests when not brogramming in the broffice, whether it’s brotein shakes, brocations at Brochella, or wildly expensive orthopaedic shoes.
But in recent years, they’ve developed a new passion. Or at least, a new name for the age-old passion of tax minimisation: tax-free cities.
Nobel laureate Paul Romer first popularised the
charter cities
idea via a 2009
TED talk
— his focus was more on unleashing economic growth in the developing world by setting up new zones with better (external) governance, but his real-world attempts have struggled due to political interference and instability: a coup upended plans in Madagascar, and he ended up quitting the Honduras project over corruption.
That Honduras project continues today as Próspera (on the famous scuba-diving island of Roatán), backed by broligarchs like Peter Thiel. There’ve been rumours this is why Trump weighed into last year’s Honduran elections — to stop local efforts to unwind Próspera.
Anyway, all this to say there’s a new brotropolis on the block, and it’s called Dunia Cyber City. For now it’s still a rectangle of jungle on the Tanzanian island of Zanzibar, but French bromigo Florian Fournier promises it’ll be Africa’s Singapore.
Today’s poll
Do you think this Trump v Powell saga will have wider repercussions?
✅ Yes, central bank independence matters
❌ No,  it's just another headline
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think this unrest will topple Iran's regime?
✊
Yep, it's over (26%)
🤝
Maybe just a 'soft coup' (45%)
⛓️ Nope, it'll hang on (28%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (1%)
Your two cents:
🤝
A.R:
“The head will change, the snake will remain.”
🤝
B.S:
“I would love to see the ayatollahs fall altogether, but an IRGC general or affiliated politician taking over and promising to return the state to its revolutionary roots might be a more practical outcome.”
⛓️
Y:
“Desperate leaders are not afraid to use violence, as Iran has previously demonstrated, to stay in control.”
✍️
P.N:
“To paraphrase Hemingway, ‘
slowly, slowly, then all at once.
’“