URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/is-greenland-next
Title: 🌍 Is Greenland next?

Today’s briefing:
— Is Greenland next?
— Iran simmers
— Why Vietnam banned this series
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. I swear we didn’t plan to kick off 2026 with four straight days of Trump coverage. But when the sitting US president pinches a foreign dictator from his capital, moots invading Greenland, threatens boots on the ground in Iran, and is eyeing Cuba for dessert, it’s hard to ignore.
Everyone’s hunting for a mental model for Trump that’ll help predict what comes next. He’s a reality TV star who’ll do whatever grabs eyeballs. Or he’s distracting from lousy domestic polls. Or it’s all about asserting America’s power for power’s sake. Maybe all of the above.
In unpredictable times, we love to search for patterns, even when there are none. Lately I’ve been thinking about antifragility: instead of predicting the chaos, build systems that get stronger from it. It’s the same reason we lift weights – stress the muscle and it’ll actually come back stronger. What does an antifragile foreign policy look like in 2026?
That’s very much the question facing officials in Copenhagen and Nuuk right now: how do you bear the weight of
Trump’s designs on Greenland
and come back stronger? That’s our top story today.
Number of the day
66
That’s how many international organisations the US will now leave following a
directive
from President Trump. Some on the list — like the UN’s population agency and climate treaty — were long in Trump’s crosshairs. Others are more of a surprise, like the longstanding effort to counter piracy in Asian waters, known as ReCAAP.
Land grab
Exactly a year ago to the day we
asked
, “
Why’s everyone talking about Greenland?
”. That was when incoming Trump 2.0 had taken a blowtorch to global headlines by reviving the idea that acquiring Greenland (a semi-autonomous territory of fellow NATO-member Denmark) was “
an absolute necessity
” for the US.
A year later we’re still talking about it, but suddenly everything seems more serious.
What happened exactly?
Somehow, it again all starts with a tweet. This time, hours after the stunning US capture of Maduro, conservative activist and wife of top Trump advisor Katie Miller
tweeted
a map of Greenland covered by the US flag with the caption ‘SOON’.
That triggered a verbal Europe-US escalation, culminating in the White House confirming that it’s “
currently talking about what a potential purchase would look like
”, but “
of course, utilising the US military is always an option at the commander in chief’s disposal
.”
So to recap, that’s the US (technically still Europe’s primary security guarantor) declining to rule out using force to take a NATO ally’s territory.
🙂
Why the focus on this icy territory?
Greenland sits on the motherload of minerals, but this is realistically more about location. Sitting at the intersection of the Arctic and Atlantic, it’s perfect to…
Prevent
rivals
China and Russia from dominating the strategic Arctic
Monitor critical shipping
lanes
, including new ones via melting icecaps, and
Control the
airspace
as the likely path for any Russian nukes targeting the US.
This isn’t new, which is why the US has explored taking Greenland since at least 1867. What
is
new(ish) is the quiet accumulation of announcements and speculation around
rival ‘dual use’ activity
on Greenland (like China’s proposal for a ✌️climate research✌️satellite ground station), plus Russia’s northern fleet ramping up submarine patrols around the strategic ‘GIUK Gap’ (a key Greenland-Iceland-UK chokepoint).
So the argument seems to be… everyone knows Greenland is critical, and regardless what its ~50,000 inhabitants or the Danes 3,550km (2,205mi) away prefer, it’ll eventually fall into Chinese, Russian, or American hands. So let’s just cut to the chase and make it American.
Of course, critics note that
a
) the US already has a big base with unfettered access,
b
) the US could just reverse its massive post-Cold War drawdown there,
c
) the Danes are also welcoming the US to (re)build more bases under their broad
1951 treaty
,
d
) maybe just write a letter or pick up the phone instead of humiliating an ally, and
e
) if this is really about Russia, then just help Ukraine end Putin’s neo-imperialist delusion once and for all.
So…
how would a US takeover of Greenland even work?
Option 1: Buy it
.
That’s what Rubio is telling US lawmakers — Trump’s sabre-rattling is just an
Art of the Deal
-style move to pressure Denmark into selling Greenland (Copenhagen previously declined US offers in 1867 and 1946).
Of course, Greenland itself would have to agree to any sale, but its PM has continued to reiterate, “
our country is not for sale
.” Polls back that up, with most Greenlanders still eventually wanting independence from Denmark, but 85% still against joining the US.
And bear with us here, but that brings us to a related possibility: the US could also make some kind of offer direct to the Greenlanders, like (say) a million bucks each if you vote to join the US. That’s $50B, which sounds like a chunk of change, though it’s less than what the US government spends on dialysis-related treatment in a year.
Option 2: Treaty it.
This would mean pushing (presumably via covert influence) independence from Denmark, then a ‘compact of free association’ with the US, like those already in place with the Marshall Islands and Palau. In practice that means the US provides financial and other support in return for exclusive strategic control over their territory.
Option 3: Take it
.
The Greenlanders have no standing army, and the Danes have a few hundred troops stationed there permanently (similar to the current US force up at Pituffik Space Base). But the massive US runway at Pituffik is one of the largest in the Arctic and could easily handle a rapid ramp-up — the base has a capacity for 12,000 troops.
Yet the reality is… there’s not really anyone (other than allied Danes) to fight. So in practical terms it might amount to hoisting a US flag and issuing a declaration.
Of course, the Danes would ordinarily seek NATO help if someone pulled that stunt, but this stunt would of course be courtesy of NATO’s own ‘big daddy’ (NATO’s words, not ours).
That’s why Denmark’s Frederiksen is warning if this happens, it means the end of NATO. But of course, this is arguably the most NATO-sceptic US president in history, so that might not be the warning it sounds like in Europe (though Trump has now
tweeted
“
we will always be there for NATO
”). Plus with Russia banging at Europe’s door, one might wonder whether the Danes would actually leave NATO, though the hurt would last generations: the Danes lost soldiers fighting with the US in Iraq and Afghanistan.
So… what is Europe doing about this?
Oh, you know, just the
yo
ushe
: a meekly-worded
joint statement
that not even every NATO member has bothered to sign.
The statement reads more like a trembly plea for the US to remember its role as a security guarantor. Trump responded by doubling down on his desire for Greenland.
Meanwhile, the French and German leaders are reportedly working on a contingency plan if the US moves on Greenland. Perhaps another spicily-worded message of concern?
Intrigue’s Take
This whole saga nods to several important points:
First
, the US the world thought it knew looks gone. Or perhaps more accurately, the pre-WWII US is now back: exceptionalist, transactional, and unapologetic. Or maybe this was always there, just behind a more benign and internationalist veneer.
Second
, European leaders still haven’t figured out how to respond. The default stance seems to be a hope this fever-dream passes next election — US voters don’t seem to like this Greenland play (nor the Venezuela or Canada ones), but elections turn on other issues, particularly when the alternative doesn’t cut through. Maybe what finally wakes the continent up to its new strategic reality is not Russian expansion, but American disdain.
Then
third
, sure, maybe this augurs some new golden age in America — Greenlanders and Danes be damned. But history shows the US can suffer hubris, and with big flexes against Iran, Venezuela, and Greenland, Donald Trump does seem a tad close to the sun.
Sound even smarter:
The opposition party that came second in last year’s Greenland election is more open to dialogue with the US. The party’s leader remarked this week, “
the US can’t do anything to us that Denmark hasn’t done already.
”
The Danish Defence Intelligence Service
labelled
the US a security risk last year.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇮🇷
IRAN
-
No end in sight.
Demonstrations continue to spread across Iran, with Kurdish regions joining the fray on Wednesday as unrest enters its 11th day. Triggered initially by a sudden crash in the Iranian rial, it’s all left a reported 36 people dead so far, plus thousands more arrested. (
AP
)
Comment:
These protests don’t (yet) seem to have matched the massive 2022 Mahsa Amini unrest, and the clerics are sticking to a carrots (new $7 per month subsidy) and sticks (police brutality) approach in hopes they can ride it out again.
🇬🇧
UNITED KINGDOM
-
Gotcha.
As we foreshadowed yesterday, US forces (with UK logistical support) ended up seizing the sanctioned
Bella
tanker somewhere between Iceland and Scotland after the Venezuela-bound ship U-turned back towards Russia and switched both its name and flag (to Russia). US forces seized another sanctioned Russian tanker in the Caribbean the same day. (
UK Gov
)
Comment:
No word yet on what (if anything) was on board the Bella, beyond several unidentified Russian nationals the Kremlin now says it wants back. Notice how the US just seized two sanctioned Russian tankers, and rather than any feared escalation, Moscow has done nothing but complain?
🇯🇵
JAPAN
-
Roaming charges.
An employee at Japan’s Nuclear Regulation Authority has lost a work phone containing sensitive info during a personal trip through a Shanghai airport. (
Japan Times
)
Comment:
It’s Japan’s second nuclear-info security bungle in as many months, just as Tokyo looks to restart its nuclear energy program. More broadly, for allies and friends, it’ll confirm Japan’s reputation as a weak link in the information security chain.
🇸🇦
SAUDI ARABIA
-
Out in the open.
Yesterday we flagged the mysterious disappearance of South Yemen’s UAE-backed separatist leader. The Saudis now accuse the Emiratis of smuggling him out to the UAE, as tensions between Yemen’s rival Emirati and Saudi-backed factions rise. (
DW
)
Comment
: After years of hiding their rivalry under a veil of niceties, it seems the mask has dropped, with the Saudis now actively unwinding the UAE’s recent spectacular gains in Yemen.
🇬🇷
GREECE
-
Last ditch effort.
Greece has unveiled $190M in agricultural aid, including cheaper electricity and billions in new investments, as it tries to defuse escalating farmer protests over costs and subsidies that’ve lasted nearly 40 days. (
Balkan Insight
)
Comment:
EU farmers more broadly are on edge as the bloc seems set to approve its big Mercosur trade pact with South American nations tomorrow (Friday), risking an influx of cheaper competition. Italy has been the swing voter lately, but further EU concessions seem to have gotten Rome over the line.
🇰🇭
CAMBODIA
-
Gone.
Cambodia has extradited three PRC nationals to China, including an online scam tycoon also wanted by US authorities for defrauding victims worldwide. (
AA
)
Comment:
The US and UK sanctioned this tycoon back in October, prompting us to wonder at the time how Cambodia would handle this given its close ties to both China and the tycoon. Now we have the answer: keep the West happy by taking action, but keep China happy by sending him to China, not the US.
🇲🇽
MEXICO
-
Love thy neighbour.
President Sheinbaum has pledged to continue supplying Cuba with oil after the fall of Venezuela’s Maduro, partly framing the shipments as humanitarian. (
Bloomberg
)
Comment:
Mexico seems to have quietly overtaken Venezuela as Cuba’s top source of oil last year. Meanwhile, the US energy secretary has told a Goldman conference that the US will now sell Venezuelan crude onto world markets, and deposit the funds into a US-controlled account for the Venezuelan people.
🇧🇫
BURKINA FASO
-
Holding on.
Burkina Faso says it has foiled an assassination plot against military junta leader Ibrahim Traoré, accusing his ousted predecessor of orchestrating the plan from exile in Togo, with alleged funding from Ivory Coast! (
BBC
)
Comment:
37-year-old Traoré has a record of blaming foreign interference, though there’ve been a couple of coup attempts against him since he seized power in 2022. He’s juggling a jihadist insurgency and economic malaise, though retains support at home and elsewhere in the region thanks to his pan-Africanist and Western-sceptical vision.
Extra Intrigue
The geopolitics of sports
🎿
Ski:
The International Ski and Snowboard Federation has
fined Armenian skier Mikayel Mikayelyan
after he covered the ‘Azerbaijan’ sponsor logo on his racing suit during Tour de Ski in Italy.
🏏
Cricket:
Bangladesh is now
refusing to play any T20 World Cup
cricket matches in India, after an Indian Premier League team ditched a Bangladeshi star player amid reports of violence against Hindus in Bangladesh.
⚽️ Soccer:
FIFA has announced
it’ll now use AI-powered 3D avatars
to improve offside calls at this year’s US-Mexico-Canada World Cup.
TV of the day
Credits: Netflix
Netflix has quietly pulled a hit Chinese romance (
Shine On Me
) from its Vietnam catalogue after Hanoi spotted an unwelcome cameo: not Nicholas Cage, but the nine-dash line. One episode includes a map showing Beijing's vast (and
unlawful
) claim over the South China Sea, prompting an angry Vietnam to (again) demand it be taken down.
We say ‘again’, because you’ll recall it was also Vietnam that objected after a similar map made a cameo in (of all places) the
Barbie
movie.
Today’s poll
Do you think the US will end up with Greenland?
🌎 Yes, Trump has been clear
❌ No, the costs are too high
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think Maduro's capture will embolden or deter other autocrats?
✊
Embolden (53%)
😰
Deter (42%)
✍️ Other (write in!)  (5%)
Your two cents:
✊
C.O:
“In the long term, embolden, but it is hard to say. Trump's action appeared to take the Chinese and Russians wildly off guard, which always instils a sense of caution.”
😰
S.L:
“For years, countries ‘condemned’ dictators, then did nothing. Dictators were not worried about handwringing speeches. Now the USA actually did something about repressive dictatorship in the Western Hemisphere.”
✊
C.R:
“‘Embolden' isn't the right word… more likely that other autocrats will be moved to take advantage of the chaos reigning in the West.
✍️ S.Z:
“Powerful autocrats will be emboldened. Weak autocrats will be deterred.”