URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/is-japan-in-trouble-0b9d1a89d1ccd1b7
Title: 🌍 Is Japan in trouble?

Today’s briefing:
— Is Japan in trouble?
— The Intrigue jobs board
— Why an Amazon tribe is suing the NYT
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. I always measure a country’s diplomatic power by the popularity of its national day functions. A real scientific metric, I know. Most of the ‘big’ celebrations are just around the corner here, and DC folks are already clambering to nab invites to the ‘best’ ones.
The French and the Brits still draw some of the biggest crowds, and there’s no missing the commercial and cultural razzmatazz of the Italians, UAE, and Brazil.
But right there on top is the Japanese national day event, filled with cherry blossoms, mochi, and sushi (allegedly, because we’ve never been). So, if you’re reading this, Japanese Embassy in DC, you know where to find us!
😉
Anyway, onto today’s story on
Japan’s slip as the world’s largest creditor
.
PS
— In just a few short hours, we’ll be chatting live with CNN’s legendary world-watcher,
Fareed Zakaria
. It’s online
today
(Wed), 4.30pm ET / 1.30pm PT. Join us
here
!
Number of the day
34%
That’s how far China’s BYD automaker just slashed prices in its home market, kicking off another price war and raising the spectre of more industry consolidation ahead.
Credit report
Japan just lost its title as the world’s top creditor nation for the first time in 34 years, with Germany’s $4T in net external assets now at #1, ahead of Tokyo’s $3.7T and Beijing’s $3.6T.
What does this even mean?
Japan is a ‘
creditor
’ because it owns more assets abroad than foreigners own in Japan (stocks, bonds, etc). When it’s vice versa, you’re a ‘debtor’.
We might instinctively like the sound of being a ‘creditor’ (you owe me) more than a ‘debtor’ (I owe you), but the pros and cons are pretty nuanced across borders.
In Japan’s case, there was a mix of factors at home and abroad that drove its investors and firms to stash their cash abroad for more than three decades:
After Japan’s epic 1990s
bubble
popped, its central bank kept rates low to reflate
That also kept Japan’s
yen
weak, making Japan’s exporters even more competitive
And the resulting
flood
of cheap loans and foreign currency gave Japanese firms an arsenal to hoover up assets abroad where they could get a better return.
We’ve explored examples over the years, whether it’s Japan’s status as the single biggest holder of
US government bonds
($1T), or
Nippon’s bid
to buy US Steel.
So… what’s changed?
Japan’s foreign assets actually just
grew
to another record high, so this drop to the world’s #2 creditor doesn’t necessarily reflect a shift in Japan’s trajectory.
Rather, it’s
Germany’s
trajectory that’s shifted, with a surge in its net assets reflecting…
Germany’s
recession
, which Ozempicked its appetite for imports
Strong
global demand
for Germany’s high-value exports (cars, machines), and
A
strong euro
versus the yen
, pumping the value of Germany’s foreign assets.
So where’s the intrigue?
Maybe ignore the breathless headlines about who’s winning gold or silver here.
Sure, it's true the biggest creditor countries are, on average, very rich. But so are the biggest
debtor
nations: in fact, the world’s biggest debtor is also history’s biggest economy and its most effective income-generating machine — the United States.
For us, the value lies less in the rankings, and more in the trajectories. Here are three:
First
, Germany has (as our
special edition
foreshadowed) proven semi-resilient, adapting to Russia’s energy shock to still make high-value stuff the world wants
Second
, while Germany is selling less of that stuff to China (now increasingly a competitor), it’s selling
more
to the US, Poland, and elsewhere, which hints at…
Third
, as President Trump tries to rebalance economic ties between the US and China, big US-aligned exporters like Germany and Japan
could
stand to win.
But a lot really depends on where the dust settles after Trump’s
Liberation Day
tariffs.
Intrigue’s Take
And speaking of those tariffs… there’s been a bit of talk lately drawing comparisons between this 2025 ‘
Trump Shock
’ and the ol’ ‘
Nixon Shock
’ of 1971:
Nixon
imposed 10% tariffs, ended dollar-gold convertibility, and pushed trading partners to rebalance currency valuations to revive US industry, while
Trump
has now imposed his own 10% (+) tariffs and escalated his rhetoric around currency manipulation and dollar alternatives, also in an attempt to revive US industry.
But while both used US economic might in an attempt to reshape the global economy, history has judged Nixon’s move as targeted, temporary, and ultimately successful, not just for the US, but for a broader world that eventually adapted then thrived.
As for
the Trump shock…?
This story points us in two different directions:
first
, it hints at the underlying resilience of advanced economies to withstand that shock; but
second
, it also hints at the very same imbalance Trump’s team says he’s trying to address via that shock in the first place — the notion that these big German and Japanese asset surpluses abroad just reflect weak demand at home, which he sees as harming partners like the US.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
Mode Mobile
This tech company grew 32,481%...
No, it's not Nvidia… It's
Mode Mobile
, 2023’s fastest-growing software company according to Deloitte.
Their disruptive tech, the EarnPhone and EarnOS, have helped users earn and save an eye-popping $325M+
, driving $75M+ in revenue and a massive 45M+ consumer base. And having secured partnerships with
Walmart
and
Best Buy
, Mode’s not stopping there…
Like Uber turned vehicles into income-generating assets, Mode is turning smartphones into an easy passive income source.
The difference is that you have a chance to invest early in Mode’s pre-IPO offering at just $0.30/share.
They’ve just been granted the stock ticker
$MODE
by the Nasdaq and the time to invest at their current share price is running out.
Join 41,000+ shareholders and invest at $0.30/share today.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
Trump halts student visa applications.
President Trump has told US embassies abroad to pause visa interviews for foreign students as the US prepares to expand the vetting of international students, including their social media presence. (
Politico
)
Comment:
While this move will have its supporters, the broader signal of an across-the-board pause risks eroding America’s superpower (attracting the best and brightest), just as Trump 2.0 doubles down on efforts to sustain America’s tech edge.
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
Sorry, that’s not for sale.
After an Australian outlet reported that a US private equity firm (Cerberus) wants to buy the 99-year lease for the Port of Darwin from China’s state-owned Landbridge Group, China’s foreign ministry has now reiterated the port isn’t for sale. (
ABC
)
Comment:
Two big trends on display here: one is the continued race to secure chokepoints like strategic port assets, as world powers lose trust in one another. The other is the role private firms (with quiet government links) now play to make it happen, whether in Panama, Darwin, or beyond.
🇮🇳
INDIA
-
Delhi cracks down on foreign CCTV.
Surveillance tech-makers are reportedly clashing with India’s new rules that require firms to submit their software, hardware, and source code for evaluation. (
Reuters
)
Comment
:
Delhi is worried about foreign intelligence agencies using compromised CCTV units to conduct espionage and transfer sensitive data offshore. But not just any agencies. Around 80% of the world’s CCTV cameras are made in China.
🇧🇷
BRAZIL
-
Amazon tribe sues NYT over internet exposure story.
The Marubo tribe has sued the New York Times for defamation, claiming the outlet’s 2024 story on Starlink’s arrival portrayed locals as “
unable to handle basic exposure to the internet
”. The tribe is seeking $180M in damages. (
Independent
)
🇹🇱
TIMOR-LESTE
-
ASEAN to get newest member in October?
Malaysia’s prime minister (and chair of the ASEAN regional bloc) has announced tiny Timor Leste will become ASEAN’s 11th member at October’s annual summit. (
Strait Times
)
Comment:
After years of paralysis by consensus, whether on Myanmar’s civil war or China’s vast maritime claims, the significance of this ASEAN expansion is probably just the way it shows the bloc can indeed still agree on stuff, even if it takes 14 years.
🇪🇸
SPAIN
-
Madrid fails to get minority languages on EU list.
Spain’s shockingly handsome if polarising Pedro Sánchez now holds power thanks to various minor separatist parties, but the deal was always that he’d in turn get Catalan, Basque, and Galician languages added to the EU’s official language list. (
European Council
)
Comment:
No surprises here. Getting a language listed requires the unanimous support of all 27 EU members. But just think how many of them have their own minority language dynamics that’d be unleashed if Spain’s got pushed through. Less clear is whether those separatist parties will now punish Sanchez by, say, blocking his efforts to raise defence spending to meet NATO targets.
🇿🇼
ZIMBABWE
-
A charge to listen to radio?
Zimbabwe’s president has signed a controversial law that requires all motorists to buy a license to listen to their car radios, before they can get vehicle insurance. It’s the latest effort to balance the state-run broadcaster’s books. (
BBC
)
Extra Intrigue
Intrigue jobs board
💼
Director, Head of Geopolitical Strategy @
Novo Nordisk
in Denmark
Membership and Events
@
American Foreign Service Association
in DC
Research Assistant
@
United Nations
in Santiago
Programming and Content Specialist
@
WEF
in Beijing (6-month role)
Photo of the day
Credits: Gian Ehrenzeller / Nordsee Zeitung
Greetings from the Alps
, where the hardworking girl above is one of thousands of locals now taking part in the annual Alpfahrt — farmers across the Austrian, Swiss, German, and Italian Alps drive their livestock back up to mountain pastures as the snow melts.
Today’s poll
How do you feel about international education's impact on host countries?
💰 It's a key economic export
🖊️ It's a key cultural export
🏠 It's straining local communities
💸 It's straining local economies
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think being an ambassador is riskier now than it was 20 years ago?
⚡ Yes (76%)
📉
No (23%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (1%)
Your two cents:
⚡
C.D:
“Violence, as well as disregard for the law and established norms, has escalated globally along with unhindered authoritarianism.”
📉
L.E:
“Nothing new here. Bullies with power have always pushed ambassadors as an easy target that plays well with their base.”
✍️
E.K.M:
“Depends entirely on where you’re stationed.”