URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/is-russia-seeking-an-airbase-in-indonesia3ac6
Title: 🌍 Is Russia seeking an airbase in Indonesia?

IN TODAY’S EDITION
1️⃣ A Russian airbase in Indonesia?
2️⃣ Diplomats on the move
3️⃣ Map of the day
Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
I was surprised to see China’s foreign ministry respond to US tariffs by tweeting ol’ quotes from Mao Zedong, including a Korean War speech paraphrased as, “
No matter how long this war is going to last, we will never yield.
"
It grabbed my attention, not so much because of Mao’s dark legacy or even the infamous (if safely posthumous) ‘
70% good, 30% bad
’ performance appraisal he got from his own Communist Party. Rather, because not long after Mao’s “
we will never yield
” speech, he did indeed yield (on a key sticking point around POWs).
Anyway, let’s dive into this
wild story of Russian bombers on an Indonesian island
.
PS
— We’ll take
a quick break
this Friday and Monday, but will be back from Tuesday!
THE HEADLINES
China open to trade talks?
According to Bloomberg sources, Beijing is
open to US talks
if DC takes steps to show respect, including by avoiding disparaging remarks. The news comes shortly after Trump called on China to take the first step to wind back their escalating tariffs.
China's Q1 growth exceeds expectations.
China’s official stats suggest it
grew 5.4% (yoy) in the first quarter
, buoyed by solid consumption and industrial activity. Those numbers will sour as US tariffs hit.
Nvidia to take $5.5B hit from US-China ties.
The chip giant has warned of massive write-downs after the White House flagged
new restrictions
on H20 chip sales to China. Nvidia stocks slid 6% on the news.
Trump memo suggests slashing State Department budget by half.
An internal memo reportedly suggests
nearly halving the State Department budget
, including by ending US contributions to NATO and the UN. Meanwhile, the president has ordered
a national security probe
that could bring new tariffs on critical minerals.
400,000 displaced as RSF takes Darfur camp.
Chaos has erupted after Sudan’s paramilitary
Rapid Support Forces seized the region’s largest displacement camp
. Meanwhile, the UK has hosted a summit on Sudan’s humanitarian crisis, still the world’s worst.
INTRIGUE LIVE
LAST CHANCE TO SIGN UP! (it’s tonight)
What does the future of democracy and trust in institutions look like in the age of AI and the digital era? Tune in to an exclusive deep dive on this topic and more with Audrey Tang, a Taiwanese civic-hacker-turned-Digital Minister who spearheaded policies on these issues. It’s
8.00pm US EST tonight (Wednesday)
(that’s 8.00am Taipei on Thursday).
Sign up now!
TOP STORY
Is Russia seeking an airbase in Indonesia?
First it’s all the cars out front during inspection times. Then the new neighbours move in, dump some auto parts on the front lawn (which they immediately stop mowing), and yell at Premier League matches kicking off at 3am.
The bad neighbours have arrived
.
We’ve all experienced something like that. Heck, Seth Rogen and Zac Efron did a whole
movie
about it. So we might all have a sense of how various capitals in the Indo-Pacific are now feeling after reports emerged of Russia wanting an air-base in the region.
Specifically, defence outlet Janes dropped an
explosive report
claiming Moscow has lodged a request to house long-range bombers and other aircraft at Indonesia’s Manuhua Air Force Base in its Papua province.
Russia supposedly
lodged the request in February
after a meeting between Indonesia’s defence minister and Putin’s recently side-lined Sergei Shoigu (his ex-defence minister).
Anyway, nations then scrambled on the news:
Australia
(which hosts US forces a quick 1,300km / 808mi hop away in Darwin) wanted answers from…
Indonesia
, whose defence minister reportedly issued immediate denials, while…
The Kremlin
has declined to comment beyond labelling it all “
fake news
”.
Now, we’re not great at maths, but something doesn’t quite add up.
So what’s going on here?
Maybe it’s
a lie
seeded by Moscow to rattle a US-allied Ukraine-backer (Australia)
Maybe
it’s true
, and seeded by Moscow for the same reasons above
Maybe
it’s true
, and Indonesia’s defence minister just wasn’t in the loop because the request went via President Prabowo (who recently called Putin a “
real friend
”)
Maybe
it’s true
, and Western spooks seeded the story to bring sunlight in, trigger local opposition, and force a public response from Jakarta and Moscow, all without revealing sources (Indonesia’s initial denials could be tactical), and/or
Maybe
it’s true
, and perhaps even Indonesia seeded it to milk a few concessions from the West before rejecting Russia’s request.
In considering which option it might be, let’s consider three things.
First
, Janes is a legit outlet, and its report cites various Indonesian officials as sources. It also made its name when a US spook shared top-secret US spy satellite images in the 80s (if any Intriguers would like to hook us up like that, you know where to find us
😍
).
Second
, there’s precedent. The Russian and Indonesian navies held their first joint drills just after Prabowo’s inauguration last year, and the Kremlin flew bombers to the exact same island in 2017 when Australia was co-leading a push for accountability over Russia’s downing of MH17.
And
third
, there are motives at play.
For
Russia
, this kind of deployment would:
Help cultivate ties with a major non-aligned player like Indonesia
Impose costs on a US-aligned Ukraine-backer like Australia
Project Russia’s (limited) regional power further into the Pacific
Thereby project the image of Russia as a global power, and
Thereby consolidate Putin’s own strongman image back home.
For
Indonesia
, this kind of deployment
could
:
Fit Prabowo’s thirst for a bigger, bolder, and more omnidirectional Indonesia
Fit Prabowo’s history of relatively Moscow-friendly words and deeds, and
Counter what he
might
see as excessive Western presence in his region, given…
He headed up Indonesia’s special forces before Timor Leste’s 1999 referendum, which led to an Australian-led (and US-backed) military intervention.
And as for
Australia
? This has dropped right in the middle of an election campaign, with mutual recriminations now flaring up on whether anyone’s over/under-egging the threat for political gain. And that’s all just as the Aussies are still processing
a)
China’s shock 2022 security deal with Solomon Islands, and
b)
allied life under Trump 2.0.
So, while capitals and reporters still scramble for details, there’s enough to this story to make it worthy of reflection — yes, regardless of whether it even ends up true or not.
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
So do we think it’s true?
It’s hard to see how or why a legit outlet like Janes would suddenly invent multiple official sources, so our
gut
(on the limited evidence) is there’s truth here somewhere.
But even if that’s the case, we’re still just talking about
a Russian
request
at this stage, which Jakarta can reject at will. Unless, of course, Putin has cards to play? And sure — Indonesia has always wanted his Sukhoi Su-35 fighter jets, for example.
But the other thing to recall is
Putin’s military and economy
is a flaming hot mess right now, and getting worse as coal and gas prices plummet. So the mere leak of this story helps Putin pretend otherwise, while implicitly accusing the West of hypocrisy by drawing parallels between hypothetical Russia bombers in Indonesia, and actual NATO basing in Europe (which is, of course, a response to Russia’s history of invading).
Meanwhile, the response in Australia has been revealing, and perhaps an acknowledgement that while US leadership has never been perfect, whatever comes next might be worse.
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇺🇿
Uzbekistan
: Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan have now
sent ambassadors to EU member Cyprus
. It’s being seen as a Central Asian tilt towards Brussels rather than Turkey, which occupies the island’s north.
🇭🇺
Hungary
: The US has
lifted sanctions on PM Orbán’s cabinet chief
, just months after Biden announced them over corruption claims. This new US update doesn’t retract the allegations, but notes they’re inconsistent with US interests.
🇻🇳
Vietnam
: Vietnam’s most populous city is
banning evening tutoring
to ease pressure on students. Ho Chi Minh City has long tried to curb the tutoring sector over fears it harms students and adds to financial stress on families.
🇵🇪
Peru
: Former first lady Nadine Heredia has
sought asylum in Brazil’s Lima embassy
, the same day she and her husband (former president Ollanta Humala) copped 15-year sentences over illicit election finance. No word yet from Brazil.
🇿🇦
South Africa
: Pretoria has
appointed a new DC envoy
after the US ousted the last guy over his comments on race and Trump 2.0. South Africa wants Mcebisi Jonas, a former deputy finance minister, to “
rebuild and maintain
” US ties.
FROM OUR SPONSORS
Your Mental Health Matters — Find Support that Works
If you’ve been putting your mental health last, you’re not alone. Over 5 million people have trusted BetterHelp, and 93% of clients are matched with a therapist who meets their unique needs.
72% of BetterHelp users see symptom reduction within 12 weeks. With access to 300+ support groups and 35+ classes, take the first step and get 30% off your first three months.
Find Support Now.
EXTRA INTRIGUE
✈️ Diplomats on the move
🇮🇷
There’s confusion whether
Iran
’s foreign minister will head to Rome or Muscat for the next talks with US envoy Steve Witkoff this Saturday (Iran says it’s Oman).
🇮🇹
Speaking of Rome, America’s JD Vance is due there Friday, a day after
Italy
’s Giorgia Meloni becomes Europe’s first leader to visit Trump post-
Liberation Day
.
🇶🇦
And Russia’s Putin will host
Qatar
’s emir tomorrow (Thursday), as the Gulf monarchy straddles hosting a US base while maintaining warm ties with Putin.
MAP OF THE DAY
Credits: Google Maps. We added the big arrow (you’re welcome).
We’ve got another map spat, Intriguers.
Years ago, everyone called that above blue patch
the South China Sea
. But then China lodged vast (and
unlawful
) claims to 90% of it, encroaching on waters claimed not only by the Philippines, but also Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, Taiwan, and Vietnam.
So Manila started referring to its own slice as the ‘West Philippine Sea’ from 2011. That’s why local netizens got excited when they noticed Google Maps is now following suit. Manila’s Congress is
declaring
it’s an endorsement of Philippine sovereignty, while Beijing is
doubling down
on the ol’ South China Sea name.
As for Google? It’s telling outlets to chill, noting the West Philippine Sea “
has always been labeled on Google Maps. We recently made this label easier to see at additional zoom levels.
”
DAILY POLL
What do you think's going on with this Russia-Indonesia airbase report?
🇷🇺 It's a lie leaked by Russia
📣 It's true, leaked by Russia
🤷 It's true, but Jakarta's defence minister didn't know
🕵️ It's true, leaked by Western intel
🇮🇩 It's true, leaked by Indonesia
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think this US approach to LatAm will curb China's influence in the region?
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️ 👍 Yes, it's blunt but effective (34%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
👎 No, strong-arming your neighbours is counterproductive (63%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!)  (3%)
Your two cents:
👎
A:
“When one entity offers the stick, the other will offer the carrot as an alternative. Carrots are economically & socially healthier.”
👍 M:
“Trump shares some of the region’s machismo — something many will admire and respect.”
✍️ I.P:
“Latin America is not a pawn in the game of great power chess. If the US really wants to improve relations in Latin America, it needs to put its money where its mouth is — put investments behind its diplomatic rhetoric — while also admitting and correcting for the history of unjust U.S. involvement in the region's affairs, and recognize countries as equals rather than as subordinates.”
Was this forwarded to you? We're a team of ex-diplomats producing a concise and engaging geopolitical briefing for 120k+ leaders each day.
It’s free to subscribe
.