URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/is-trump-gunning-for-venezuela-regime-change
Title: 🌍 Is Trump gunning for Venezuela regime change?

Today’s briefing:
— Will Trump force Venezuela regime change?
— How Putin dupes Cubans into his war
— World’s most intriguing yard sale
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. To close out the week, we’re heading back to one of my favourite places: we’re talking the land of tasty arepas, ice-cold Polar beers, soaring waterfalls, endless oil reserves, irresistible tunes, and… yes, Nicolás Maduro.
I first landed in Venezuela as a college student the same month of 2005 when Maduro emerged as speaker of Venezuela’s house. A year later, he was foreign minister. After Hugo Chavez then fell to cancer in 2013, Maduro took the presidency, and never let go.
He likes to blame gringo sanctions for Venezuela’s collapse that’s now spurred
eight million folks
to flee, rattling other parts of the continent. But the reality is Venezuela’s collapse started back when oil prices halved in 2014 — Maduro’s revenue tide suddenly went out, and he got caught swimming naked (mismanaging a wealthy economy).
Anyways, Venezuela’s bus-driver-turned-dictator is back in the headlines again, amid mounting speculation
Donald Trump is hustling to oust Nicolás Maduro
.
Number of the day
$10B
That’s how much a global carbon tax on shipping could raise each year if implemented. Members of the International Maritime Organization are due to vote on the proposal in London today (Friday), amid US efforts to sink (badum-chi) the measure.
Speculative action
Anyone familiar with life in a foreign ministry or
any
big organisation will be painfully familiar with the ‘
compliment sandwich
’: soften that feedback by saying something nice!
So let’s start this briefing up-front with a thin slice of stale sourdough acknowledging one area where Venezuelan dictator Nicolás Maduro has clearly excelled: he has good hair.
As for the meaty reason we’ve called this meeting? President Trump raised a few eyebrows Wednesday when he confirmed NYT reports he’d authorised lethal covert CIA operations in Venezuela, and was even considering strikes on Venezuelan territory!
So, is Trump now gunning to force regime change in Venezuela?
Let’s kick off with the (dwindling) ‘no’ camp.
First
, even some in Trump’s circle (including his top guy on Venezuela, Ric Grenell) are arguing there’s still time for diplomacy to do its thing here.
Second
, we imagine Grenell and others will be warning of the risks of yet another direct US intervention in Latin America, whether in irking Trump’s own anti-interventionist base at home, further entrenching Maduro’s grip given the military’s apparent loyalty, or playing into Moscow and Beijing’s broader narratives of US bullying and volatility.
And
third
, if you’re actually pulling a top secret trigger to oust or assassinate Maduro, you don’t usually announce it on prime-time TV beforehand. Or at least… we wouldn’t?
Anyway, that’s a wrap of how this all
might
just be a bravado-flex to pressure Maduro into concessions, whether a peaceful transition to last year’s actual election winner (Edmundo González) or even just more pinkie promises to respect the next election.
Meanwhile, the ‘yes’ camp (ie, Trump will force Maduro out) is getting bigger.
First
, there’s Trump’s
motive
. Following Venezuela’s economic collapse, an increasingly desperate Maduro has clung to power, stolen elections, and cosied up to fellow US rivals like Putin, Xi, and even Iran’s mullahs. Meanwhile, Trump’s instincts, his Panama Canal moves, and his draft defence strategy all point to him wanting a USA on top in the region.
Second
, there’s the
words
: Trump has been notably fixated on Maduro since Trump 1.0, but he’s really ramped up his rhetoric since returning to the White House this year, labelling the Venezuelan strongman a drug-lord and even a terrorist.
Third
, he’s backed that rhetorical ramp-up with
actions
, doubling his Maduro bounty to $50M, and deploying a massive military presence to the Caribbean that’s now hit five or six alleged narco-boats off Venezuela, leaving 27 dead — it’s sparking not just outrage in DC, but also seemingly now the departure of the new-ish top US commander.
And
finally
, there are the purported (and contested)
legal justifications
congealing not just around Maduro being a narco-terrorist, but also (say) the possibility of last year’s election-winner (González) giving Venezuelan consent to any US military action on his national turf — he and Nobel laureate Corina Machado are in close touch with the US.
Anyway,
all of the above
— with a US president riding high on a Gaza win, and getting a feel for the trigger after his Iran hits — points to Trump maybe using force to oust Maduro.
Oh, and we promised a compliment sandwich, so let’s wrap this meeting up with one final piece of sourdough, shall we? Maduro has a very good moustache.
Intrigue’s Take
So… is the ‘yes’ or ‘no’ camp right here? Our sense is
they’re
both
right
, and Trump’s team is now scaling up from one to the other until the president gets the outcome his team is now privately confirming he wants: one way or another, he wants Maduro gone.
And there are reports
this scale-up might already be working
. The Miami Times (from the US city now hosting several Venezuelan opposition figures) is
reporting
Maduro has now authorised two offers to the US via Qatar, with him stepping aside in favour of two lieutenants, the Rodriguez siblings (Delcy is his veep, and Jorge is his house speaker).
But interestingly, the folks from the Miami Herald report
the White House has said no
. Why? This kind of arrangement would fundamentally preserve Maduro’s same illegitimate regime, but just give it a fresh face. And even that fresh Rodriguez face (with Maduro exiled to Turkey or Qatar) is still marred by persistent claims of trafficking and laundering.
So what’s the alternative?
There are also persistent reports Venezuela’s opposition (including this year’s Nobel laureate) is in the midst of detailed planning for a smooth transition of power after Maduro is gone. And maybe that brings us to where we started: it seems increasingly plausible Maduro’s days are numbered. We just don’t know how.
Sound even smarter:
If you’re interested, Americas Quarterly just ran
an interesting piece
on China’s winning military diplomacy strategy across Latin America.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇸🇦
SAUDI ARABIA
-
Protection
.
Riyadh is reportedly close to securing a defence pact with the US ahead of the Crown Prince’s White House visit next month. Details are TBC, but word is the Saudis want something like Qatar’s new NATO-like US guarantee from last month. (
FT
$)
Comment
: You could argue this reflects regional doubts around US commitment, as US partners effectively seek reassurance. But it also suggests Gulf states still clearly see the US as the only power capable of defending them, if not always willing.
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
Another indictment
.
The US justice department has indicted former Trump 1.0 national security advisor John Bolton on 18 criminal counts related to mishandling of classified information. (
Al Jazeera
)
Comment
: The charges (which Bolton rejects as political) apparently relate to him emailing classified info to relatives for his memoirs (which ended up highly critical of Trump). Word is the alleged details emerged during an earlier federal investigation into Iran’s hack of Bolton’s same address. What is it with DC and emails?
🇬🇧
UNITED KINGDOM
-
Out of the shadows.
The UK’s MI5 (domestic intelligence) chief has used his annual address to warn that London now faces “
multiple overlapping threats on an unprecedented scale
” from both terror groups and states (particularly China, Russia, and Iran). (
SCMP
$)
Comment:
His blunt words on China (‘a daily threat’) come just as PM Starmer grapples with why a China-linked UK espionage case against two Brits suddenly collapsed last month. Interestingly, Starmer just released his government’s court testimony that was similarly blunt about China, pushing back on claims that maybe his team was responsible for the case fail. We explored UK-China ties
yesterday
.
🇭🇺
HUNGARY
-
Alaska 2.0?
Following another lengthy phone call with Putin, President Trump has announced he’ll have a second summit with his Russian counterpart, this time in Hungary
“within two weeks or so.”
(
Trump’s Truth Social
).
Comment
: Lots of questions here, like
a
) how Putin would even get to Hungary (he’d have to cross not only NATO members, but nations bound to execute his ICC arrest warrant);
b
) whether Putin will show more interest in peace than he did in Alaska, and
c
) whether Trump has
forced
him to show any more interest yet. To the contrary, it might just be another ploy to string DC along while Putin keeps attacking.
🇱🇦
LAOS
-
Redirection.
Laos has announced plans to cut power to crypto miners by early 2026, instead redirecting that juice to higher value exploits like metal refining and energy sales to Vietnam and Singapore. The Southeast Asian nation, rich in cheap hydropower, became a crypto hub after a 2021 policy pivot. (
Reuters
)
🇨🇦
CANADA
-
Say what now?
Hackers have briefly taken over the announcements and flight information screens at four airports (Windsor, Kelowna, and Victoria in Canada, plus Harrisburg PA in the US), broadcasting pro-Hamas and anti-Trump messages. (
NYT
)
Comment
: This was ultimately just a nuisance, but still a vivid hint of what capitals mean when they warn of vulnerable critical infrastructure.
🇰🇪
KENYA
-
Memorial turns bloody
.
Police have fired tear gas in clashes that’ve left at least three dead, as thousands of mourners gathered to see the body of Kenya’s revered former prime minister, Raila Odinga. He died in India on Wednesday. (
BBC
)
Extra Intrigue
Three stories we couldn’t shoehorn in this week
🥾
Details are emerging around how
Cubans get roped
into joining Putin’s war on Ukraine
, including via sketchy Russia-based ‘travel agencies’ offering jobs.
Germany’s Friedrich Merz
wants
a
joint European stock exchange
to avoid homegrown firms running to Wall Street for capital.
And the US just
dropped out
of the
top 10 most powerful passports
(by number of visa-free travel destinations) for the first time in 20 years.
Sale of the day
Credits: MaddytheB, Instagram.
Calling all DC Intriguers!
Ever wanted to raid a diplomat’s closet? The Associates of the American Foreign Service Worldwide have the perfect option, because their annual
Art & BookFair
wraps this weekend at the Department of State.
All items are donated by US foreign service families who’ve been around the world and back — we’re talking thousands of trinkets from just about every country-code, from art and artefacts through to books and stamps. All proceeds go to worthy causes.
Friday Quiz
Today is International Day for the Eradication of Poverty.
1) What's the current (as of June 2025) extreme poverty line?
A daily income (USD) of less than...
$3.00
$4.30
$5.45
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) What percentage of the global population lives in extreme poverty?
(per the World Bank's September update)
1.2%
10.3%
15.1%
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) Which country has lifted the most people out of poverty in the past 40 years?
India
China
Indonesia
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate