URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/is-the-imf-dead-5113750bcd026d7a
Title: 🌍 Is the IMF dead?

Today’s newsletter:
— Is the IMF dead?
— Intrigue’s weekend tips
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. My grandfather was an IMF economic analyst in Washington DC back in the late 1940s. If there ever was an exciting time to be a central banker—and he insisted there was—it was then.
But of all his stories, one stood out.
When his Washington posting was ending, he worked the system so he was “
forced
” to go home the long way round — a 3-month adventure with “
essential
” stops in New York, London, Cairo, Bombay (as it was then known), and Singapore before finally disembarking in Sydney, thoroughly sunned, soothed, and satisfied at having his employer foot the bill for his and my grandmother’s extended holiday.
Safe to say all the diplomats in our audience are reading this with a wince—times and taxpayer expectations have changed.
Anyway, our Washington correspondent Kristen has been bouncing around
the IMF’s 2025 meetings in DC
this week, so let’s dive into what you need to know.
Is the IMF dead?
It was a week ago that International Monetary Fund (IMF) head Kristalina Georgieva kicked off the Fund’s DC ‘spring meetings’ with an ominous note —
“trade policy uncertainty is off the charts”
.
You could feel it in the DC air, with Intrigue sources confirming delegations from every corner of the globe were scrambling for meetings with Trump’s team while in town.
Or you could just read it in the Fund’s
new data
, pointing to:
A
slower
global growth forecast (from 3.3% to 2.8%)
Slightly stickier
inflation
(revised back up by 0.1%)
Greater odds of
a US recession
(now 37%, up from ~25%), and
Slower growth in
China
(down to 4% from 5%).
Why? The Fund’s top French economist put it
Frenchly
bluntly: it’s “
the abrupt increase in tariffs
”.
But with the week now behind us, did the IMF achieve its mission of
a)
driving more cooperation,
b)
more trade and growth, and
c)
discouraging policies that harm prosperity?
Well, allow us to answer that with four quotes we’ve heard this week: two from the big multilaterals, one from the world’s largest economy, and one from the business world.
“We are entering a new era as the global economic system that has operated for the last 80 years is being reset”
— Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, IMF chief economist
That’ll seem obvious for any Intriguer, but for the IMF to lay it out so plainly with thousands of foreign officials there hoping to get a pulse on the markets? Wow.
But while France’s Gourinchas dropped the truth bombs, his boss (Bulgaria’s Georgieva) sprinkled some hope over the rubble, noting finance ministers must now return home and hit play on all the much-needed reforms they’ve been putting off.
“The Bretton Woods institutions must step back from their sprawling and unfocused agendas, which have stifled their ability to deliver on their core mandates”
– Scott Bessent, US treasury secretary
Just a day after the IMF unveiled its gloomy outlook, Bessent appeared at DC’s Institute of International Finance and argued the IMF and the World Bank suffer from mission creep (he cited climate change, for example, inviting some pushback from Georgieva).
Of course, that made headlines as further evidence the US is ditching multilateralism. But the bit that
didn’t
make headlines came a few moments later
in Bessent’s speech
, when he flagged that the US wants to
“expand its leadership role”
in the IMF and World Bank.
“With the policy volatility, you actually undermine the very goal you’re trying to achieve”
— Ken Griffin, Citadel founder
While various CEOs in town continued to toe a Trump-friendly line this week, some like Griffin seemed bolder (at least compared to his cautious vibes during the campaign).
Still, off-stage, business leaders told Intrigue they understand Trump’s vision to bulk up US industry and rebalance its trade ties — and many believe he’s now gotten the hint about the need to make that shift without whiplashing the markets.
“What I have seen this week is really a whole collection of the impossible becoming possible”
– Kristalina Georgieva, IMF managing director
Wrapping up onstage with ministers from Argentina, the UK, and Germany, the IMF chief was still channelling her inner Oprah (dishing out positivity, not a Prius).
For example, all four VIP panellists were in furious agreement around one buzzword –
“deregulation”
. Whether it’s the UK loosening its climate policy, Germany somehow ditching its debt brake,
or Argentina somehow stabilising its spending, all agreed on the need for governments to get out of the way.
A thrilled Georgieva even offered all Germans in the audience a round of applause (not a Prius).
Intrigue’s Take
With all those vibes in DC, you’d be forgiven if you forgot the week’s official theme was actually ‘
Jobs - The Path to Prosperity
’. These events are planned months in advance, but nobody was really focused on jobs this week, other than as a by-product of the thing everyone
was
focused on: tariffs.
Still, the quote that most grabbed our attention was also the one probably most easily overshadowed: it was Bessent’s pledge for greater US leadership within the very Bretton Woods system (IMF, World Bank) it created in the afterglow of WWII.
It’s interesting because it gets at the heart of
a dilemma
still playing out on the world stage right now — as China’s economy kept growing through the 2000s, the US had to manage two competing priorities:
Upholding the
credibility
of its own creations like the IMF, while also
Competing
with a rising and changing China.
The US, for example, supported doubling China’s IMF vote share way back in 2010 (
credibility
), but delayed its implementation for years (
competition
).
Of course, we’ve seen
China’s counter-moves
, too, pushing its own alternative institutions like the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and its beleaguered BRICS bank.
We mention all this because it encapsulates the same big tango that’ll shape our next century, as the US tries to thread between:
The risk of blowback if it curbs China too hard, and
The risk of losing if it concedes too much.
Copy and paste your unique link to share this story (and win prizes!) 👇
{{rp_refer_url}}
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
Growth School
Make 2025 your Best Year With This $399 FREE AI Masterclass
If you don’t become an AI-enabled professional in 2025, you will:
Get replaced by a person who uses AI.
Face slow career growth and income.
Spend hours on tasks that can be done in 10 minutes.
Here’s why you can’t miss this:
✅
Learn 30+ cutting-edge AI tools to completely transform the way you work, market, and lead.
✅
Automate your workflows and reclaim
20+ hours a week
✅
Create an
AI-powered version of YOU
—a digital clone that handles the tedious work while you focus on what truly matters.
This 3 hour workshop will make you a master of prompting & talk about hacks, strategies & secrets that only the top 1% know of. So don’t think twice, you have NOTHING to lose.
Register here
(first 100 people get it for free + $500 bonus)
🎁
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES — China to suspend tariffs on some US goods?
According to Bloomberg, China is mulling tariff exemptions for US goods it needs like medical equipment, industrial chemicals, and plane leases. But the two sides are still publicly clashing on whether they’re even in talks, with Trump saying yes and China saying no (they both have political incentives to be right). (
Bloomberg
$)
Comment:
There’s been plenty of analysis on America’s China-dependence, so it’s interesting to see examples of the reverse. Another interesting example of China-dependence? Japan is reportedly resisting US efforts to form a bloc against China, because of the sheer size of Japan-China trade.
🇮🇳
INDIA — Nuclear-armed foes India and Pakistan still on the brink.
Since Tuesday’s terrorist attack, Pakistani and Indian forces along their Kashmir border have exchanged fire (no casualties reported). Meanwhile, the tit-for-tat measures have continued, with Pakistan in turn expelling Indian diplomats, cancelling Indian-held visas, closing airspace to Indian airlines, and warning that any halt to Pakistan’s water supplies would be an “
act of war
”. (
AFP
)
Comment:
Our view from
yesterday
remains unchanged — an Indian airstrike on jihadi bases in remote Pakistan feels inevitable, with Pakistan’s matched responses above underscoring the risk of a miscalculation as they both climb the escalatory ladder.
🇻🇦
VATICAN CITY — Pope frontrunners emerge ahead of Francis funeral.
As world leaders head to the Vatican for the pope’s funeral tomorrow (Saturday), one name doing the rounds as a possible successor is Italy’s own Cardinal Pietro Parolin, a moderate figure and the Vatican’s current secretary of state. (
BBC
)
Comment:
Of the last six conclaves, the presumed favourite has only emerged as pope once (that was Benedict in 2005). As we explored on
Monday
, our view is traditional figures might become more influential in the digital and multipolar decades ahead.
🇨🇦
CANADA
:
PM Carney on track to win Monday’s elections?
The most recent polls suggest PM Carney’s Liberals are on track to win Monday’s elections, with the conservative opposition a close second. (
YouGov
)
🇲🇵
NORTHERN MARIANAS
:
The US revives another WWII base.
The US is restoring an 80-year-old military facility on Tinian — it’s the same island from where US B-29s dropped atomic bombs on Imperial Japan during WWII. The refurb is part of US deterrence efforts in the Pacific, though Australia’s ABC reports locals are now worried about becoming a target in any war. (
ABC
)
🇪🇸
SPAIN
:
Madrid blocks Israeli arms deal.
Madrid has cancelled a ~$7M deal to buy 15 million bullets from an Israeli supplier. It’s part of Spain’s halt on any weapons trading with Israel in protest at its war with Hamas. (
Politico
)
🇸🇦
SAUDI ARABIA
:
Airbus to get its titanium from the Saudis.
Aerospace giant Airbus has announced it’ll source titanium for its planes from Saudi Arabia, as part of a $666M raw materials deal. In exchange, the kingdom has ordered as many as 20 long-range aircraft for its flag carrier. (
Gulf News
)
Extra Intrigue
Some weekend recommendations from Team Intrigue
Listen
to the story of a young man
forced to join Assad’s troops
, and what this past means for his future in a new Syria.
Watch
our interview with Taiwanese ambassador-at-large Audrey Tang on the
future of democracy in the age of AI
.
Read
about what it's really like to
experience a new colour, ‘olo
’.
Friday quiz
1) Which of the following is the world's newest currency?
🇿🇼 Zimbabwe Gold aka ZiG
🇦🇴 Angolan kwanza
🇧🇧 Barbadian dollar
🇬🇪 Georgian lari
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) Which country issued the highest ever denomination banknote?
(100 quintillion)
🇿🇼 Zimbabwe
🇭🇺 Hungary
🌍 Former Yugoslavia
🇻🇪 Venezuela
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) The British pound is widely considered the world's oldest currency still in circulation. How old is it?
~ 600 years
~ 900 years
~1200 years
~ 1800 years
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate