URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/is-trump-re-thinking-his-putin-summit-2bec4cdcd87b0d7a
Title: 🌍 Is Trump re-thinking his Putin summit?

Today’s briefing:
— Is Trump re-thinking his Putin summit?
— Who crashed that Bentley
— Release the tyres
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. I have a recurring dream about being left out of a pick-up game of soccer. Not your dime-a-dozen dream about being the last to be picked, just being flat out excluded all together.
Let’s leave the deeper meaning of all of that for my overworked therapist, and focus on making sure you aren’t left out of our new and improved social media content! We’ve been posting gold on our accounts every day, so throw us a follow/like on
Instagram
,
X (Twitter)
,
Facebook
,
LinkedIn
, and definitely
YouTube
. It will really help us grow and keep this whole show on the road!
Speaking of not wanting to be left out, today’s deep dive is on
how Europe is coping with not being in the room
when Trump and Putin meet in Alaska tomorrow.
PS —
¿Hablas español?
¡Check out our
weekly edition in Spanish
!
Mystery of the day
Who crashed that Bentley in Sydney?
Chinese-language social media is awash with speculation over the identity of a mysterious 23-year-old woman who crashed her Tiffany-Blue Bentley in a ritzy corner of Sydney, Australia. Her reported wealth, bodyguards, and scrubbed online profile are fuelling
speculation
she’s related to China’s leadership, with rumours ranging from her being a great-granddaughter of former president Yang Shangkun, to a niece of Xi Jinping himself.
T-minus 24 hours until Alaska
Love that even among world leaders, a Zoom call always has at least one head way too big.
When news broke that Presidents Trump and Putin were ironing out the details on an Alaska summit (likely at Joint Base Elmendorf-Richardson), Europe’s initial response was wtf.
But there’s no feeling of strategic exclusion that jumping on a quick Zoom call can’t fix, so that’s what President Trump did with his counterparts from Ukraine and Europe yesterday.
Here are the top five quotes you need to know:
“They thanked President Trump for his efforts in bringing Putin to the table in pursuit of a ceasefire to end to the ongoing bloodshed” —
Keir Starmer, Prime Minister, UK
🇬🇧
The interesting thing about this British statement is what it reveals about Europe’s entire approach to the Alaska summit:
a tightrope
. They’re obviously alarmed that no European leader, let alone Ukraine’s own president, is invited to a summit about Europe’s future.
But the Brits are also reportedly urging the Europeans to tone down any public demands, fearing they could just end up annoying the US president. And interestingly, Trump himself has toned down his messaging on Alaska, framing it more as a “
listening exercise
”.
“Trump was very clear on the fact that the US wants to obtain a ceasefire at this meeting in Alaska” —
Emmanuel Macron, President, France
🇫🇷
All the European leaders noted their understanding President Trump wants a ceasefire tomorrow, but the president himself then hosed that down at the Kennedy Center an hour later, telling reporters any ceasefire might need a second meeting including Zelensky.
“If there is no movement on the Russian side in Alaska, then the United States and we Europeans should and must increase the pressure” —
Friedrich Merz, Chancellor, Germany
🇩🇪
Now lest you think this was just wishful thinking, Merz went on to claim “
President Trump is aware of this position and largely shares it.”
And lest you think
this
was wishful thinking, the president himself went on to reiterate his Putin doubts to reporters:
“I’ve had a lot of good conversations with him, then I go home and see a rocket hit a nursing home.”
The president then (again) warned of
“very severe consequences”
if Putin’s not serious.
“Take it from us… Putin has no intention to stop his expansionist pursuit" —
Elina Valtonen, Foreign Minister, Finland
🇫🇮
That ‘
take it from us
’ is a reference to Russia’s century-long rule over Finland until 1917, plus the Finns then stunning the world by somehow fending off 26 of Stalin’s divisions — he ended up with 10% of Finland, rather than the full annexation he wanted.
That kind of history explains why Finland and others bordering Russia tend to be the least starry-eyed in the room, seeing Putin’s peace overtures as more stalling and misdirection.
“Pressure on Russia works” —
Volodymyr Zelensky, President, Ukraine
🇺🇦
Zelensky has long held firm to the same basic principle:
nothing about us without us
. So it was interesting to then see him (after the Zoom chat) call for more allied investments in Ukraine’s industry, particularly drones.
The message there is that he’s realistic about the prospects of peace with Putin, so is doubling down on Ukraine’s ability to keep defending itself
.
Intrigue’s Take
Our sense is President Trump has genuinely eased some of his hard-line positions towards Europe, and that’s partly thanks to Europe itself:
NATO members (ex-Spain) have now endorsed his 5% spending target
Europeans have bank-rolled more of Ukraine’s self-defence, and
The Financial Times just compiled some remarkable data suggesting a historic
tripling
in the pace of Europe’s rearmament is now underway.
So any freeloading might be receding into the rear-view, while Zelensky’s methodical gratitude for every ounce of support blunts any (Kremlin-fanned) claims of insouciance.
But the other comment that grabbed our attention came from the US president himself, voicing irritation at claims tomorrow’s Alaska summit is shaping up as a Putin win. All of that, combined with Trump reframing Friday as a listening exercise, leaves us wondering if we’re more headed towards the kind of anti-climax Europe and Ukraine can live with.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
The Hustle
The Hustle is on a mission to deliver the best business-tech daily in the industry, and they're not afraid to be different. Critics have called them "a bit too silly and simplistic," "too techy," or "too much about numbers"—but that's exactly the point. They're flipping the script on all that negative, doom-and-gloom news you're getting everywhere else. Instead, The Hustle focuses on growth opportunities, emerging trends, and real innovation that impacts your world. It's business news that helps you stay informed while actually having some fun.
Get The Hustle in your inbox today
and experience the difference for yourself.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇰🇵
NORTH KOREA
-
Hack the hackers.
A niche hacking magazine has unveiled how two
ethical hackers
managed to infiltrate a North Korean state-sponsored hacking group (‘Kimsuky’), then dump its secrets online. The trove reveals Kimsuky’s recent hits included the entire source code for South Korea’s foreign ministry email platform. (
Phrack
💾
)
Comment:
Combined with
word
the US has been placing secret devices to trace AI chip smuggling into China, this tale offers rare insight into Western cyber-manoeuvring.
🇨🇷
COSTA RICA
-
I’ll have what she’s having.
Long considered Central America’s safest nation, Costa Rica has announced it’ll start building a new El Salvador-inspired maximum-security prison to help confront its gang-related wave of violent crime. (
Reuters
)
Comment:
The results of El Salvador’s latest ‘mano dura’ approach have been remarkable, and we’ve long foreshadowed others will follow. We just wonder whether El Salvador’s smaller size and clearer criminal structure might limit the degree to which its lessons can be implemented elsewhere.
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
Dig deeper.
China’s largest lithium producer (Ganfeng) is teaming up with a Swiss-based player to develop one of South America’s largest lithium (saline water) projects, merging three brine operations into one. (
SCMP
)
Comment:
Lithium oversupply (plus easing EV demand) has seen lithium prices collapse ~90% from their wild 2022 highs, placing pressure on all but the lowest-cost producers. More of the above consolidation seems inevitable.
🇪🇪
ESTONIA
-
Persona non grata.
Tallinn has declared one of Russia’s local first secretaries (mid-ranking diplomat) persona non grata, with orders to leave Estonia. (
Euronews
)
Comment:
Rather than the usual broad allegations that this diplomat was actually a spy, Estonia has specifically accused the individual of trying to divide Estonian society and contributing to crimes like sanctions violations. An Estonian national is reportedly facing related charges, so hopefully the courts will reveal more.
🇮🇩
INDONESIA
-
Lending a hand.
Jakarta is deploying 100 army battalions (typically 500-700 troops each) across the country to assist with agriculture projects, after passing new laws in March allowing a bigger government role for the armed forces. (
Strait Times
)
Comment:
President Prabowo (himself a former special forces commander) is already using troops to help roll out his signature free school meals project, but there’ll be lingering unease in a country with such fresh memories of authoritarianism.
🇧🇷
BRAZIL
-
‘Sovereign Brazil’.
That’s the name of Brasilia’s new $5.5B plan to support exporters hit by America’s 50% tariffs on roughly half of Brazil’s exports to the US. (
AP
)
Comment:
President Lula has flagged he’s not yet using Brazil’s reciprocal powers to counter the US tariffs, which ostensibly relate to the prosecution of Lula’s predecessor (Bolsonaro) over alleged coup plotting. Lula might’ve concluded it’s worth awaiting that case’s conclusion (September or October) before making his next move.
🇨🇻
CAPE VERDE
-
Damage control.
The island nation off Africa’s west coast has declared a state of emergency after Tropical Storm Erin left at least nine dead and thousands displaced. (
BBC
)
Extra Intrigue
In other worlds…
Tech:
Anthropic, the Amazon-backed AI company, is offering its products to US
lawmakers for the low low price of one dollar
.
Space:
The US is mulling a plan to
build a nuclear reactor
on the Moon, joining the likes of Moscow and Beijing who’ve already been brainstorming.
Sports:
The State Department has granted a Venezuelan little league team a permit to visit the US for a Little World Series, where it’s
beaten Puerto Rico 5-0.
From our sponsors
A Thoughtful Gift for the Most Curious Woman You Know.
Rosetta Stone makes it easy for moms to follow their curiosity, whether that’s speaking Spanish with the grandkids or finally learning Italian for that dream trip. With the Lifetime Unlimited plan, she gets access to 25 languages and a proven method that builds real-world speaking skills. This Mother’s Day, give her a gift that opens doors for just $149.
Give a Gift She’ll Never Outgrow
.
Video of the day
Every so often, there’s a combination of words you feel pretty safe declaring has never before been uttered in human history.
For example: “
Please watch this stunning drone video of a rubber tyre rolling down one of the tallest sand dunes in Chile’s Atacama Desert for three minutes set to Enya’s ‘On Time’.
”
Enjoy (and yes, they collected the tyre afterwards).
Oh, and they say never read the comments, but we must give a shout out to the quality puns (“
wheely good
”) and unbridled exuberance (“
we need more tyres rolled
”).
Fun fact:
if you think this looks like Mars, you’re right — those similarities are why NASA uses the Atacama Desert for testing instruments ahead of Mars.
Today’s poll
How do you see tomorrow's Alaska summit going?
🇷🇺 More sanctions on Russia
🇺🇦 More pressure on Ukraine
🤷 No meaningful change
✍️ Other (write us!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
What do you think about this new US deal with Nvidia?
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🤝
It's the art of the deal (16%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
😦
It sets an alarming precedent (81%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write us!) (3%)
Your two cents:
😦
R.B:
“An illegal shakedown that proves if you pay enough money the country’s secrets are for sale.”
🤝
M.M:
“Governments do this around the world all the time — think mining royalties (or even ownership stakes in a mine itself). This just seems shocking because it’s not happened in the US tech sector before.”
✍️
J.M:
“If this money is used to pay down our debt it could be significant as interest rates fall.”