URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/is-trump-s-trade-strategy-working17a98020f26597d0
Title: 🌍 Is Trump’s trade strategy working?

Today’s briefing:
— Is Trump’s trade strategy working?
— Where naked tour guides are banned
— How to make a diplomat cry
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. An ol’ diplomat friend was once serving abroad in a developing country, run by a legendary independence fighter who eventually switched his guerrilla fatigues for a suit and managed to get elected president.
So one day, my buddy went along to a big rally, hoping to catch a glimpse of that same freedom-fighter president. And catch it he did: right before the leader jumped into his motorcade, a local called out for help with her financial troubles.
The president checked his pockets, then got his bodyguards to check theirs, but darnnit, nobody had any cash. So the president scanned the gathered onlookers and spotted my bewildered pal standing there, the sole foreigner: “
hey you, lend me twenty bucks.”
My friend nervously glanced behind him — surely this world leader wasn’t asking him for $20? But the president reiterated: “
Yeah you, lend me $20!
”
So my friend fished out a crisp bill from his jacket pocket, stepped meekly forward out of the crowd, and surrendered his cash to one of the presidential bodyguards, who duly handed it to the president, who then ceremoniously handed it to the petitioning local, who scored a quick hug with her beloved president before the motorcade whisked him away. The crowd dispersed, and my buddy was left wondering wtf just happened.
Anyway, I miss those wild tales from the inside. If you have any fun ones you’d be willing to share with Intriguers (feel free to anonymize them!), just hit that reply button.
Anyway, speaking of world leaders demanding cash, we’re just days out from
President Trump’s tariff deadline hitting this Friday
! So let’s dive in.
Quote of the day
“
Pacific nations see the climate challenge as an existential threat not only to them but to all of humanity.
”
That’s what friend of Intrigue, Solomon Islands politician, and chair of the Pacific nation’s foreign relations committee Peter Kenilorea Jr (son of the first post-independence PM) told Intrigue in response to the ICJ’s
historic climate change ruling
last week. (P.S. — scroll down to the poll to find out what your fellow Intriguers think about that case)
Another deadline approaches
It's time for a quick trade update, because the president's extended deadline expires this Friday (1 August), at which point capitals without a deal theoretically face higher US tariffs.
Lots is happening as we speak, so
here’s what you need to know
:
🇨🇳
China
Beijing and DC today (Monday) kick off their third round of talks in Stockholm. And word is we'll likely just see another
extension
of their 90-day truce (which ends 12 August) rather than anything
transactional
(like China's old pledges to buy more US soybeans) let alone
structural
(like China curbing its own vast industrial over-capacity).
So why kick the can down the road again?
This de-escalated stand-off, while painful, is still both
a
)
manageable
(shipping flows attest to that), but also
b
)
necessary
to unwind their deep interdependence, whether on China's rare earths, or America's chips.
So we’re unlikely to see any big updates until Trump and Xi potentially meet at (or just before)
Korea's APEC summit in October
. That takes us to the world’s second-largest economy...
🇪🇺
The EU
Just days out from the US deadline, the EU's Ursula von der Leyen flew to meet President Trump in Scotland yesterday (Sunday), with both putting the odds of any deal at 50/50.
Even
50/50
felt high when you recall the EU’s quickest deal (with Korea) took 2.5 years. But the two emerged overnight with a high-level (detail-free) update that enables
a
) a Trump win via future EU investments and purchases,
b
) a von der Leyen win by avoiding a full trade war and instead
halving
the threatened US tariffs to 15%, then they both
c
)
delay
the much harder talks. Though these 15% US tariffs on the EU are still
seven or eight times
higher than the status quo ante, so an inflationary hit ahead feels inevitable.
The EU also seems to have learned from
history
here: you’ll recall under Trump 1.0, it skirted US tariffs by
pledging
to buy more US soy and gas, though the market winds were already blowing that way. The bloc is now likewise pledging to buy stuff it already wants: US energy and arms. That’s a little like boldly pledging to watch more Netflix.
The EU has presumably also learned from...
🇯🇵
Japan
President Trump’s big Japan deal last week featured more market access for US cars and rice in return for a capped 15% tariff on Japan plus a yuuuge $550B investment pledge (the EU then likewise got 15% and pledged $600B in unspecified investments).
But surprisingly, Tokyo's cabinet office then piped up on Friday, saying there's actually no written deal, won't be one, and that according to what Tokyo
did
agree:
Japan's
rice
purchases will still just be as needed (ie, potentially zero)
US
cars
still have to meet Japanese safety standards (ie, no major change), and
Any
investments
will be "
up to
" $550B (ie, theoretically 'zero' fits that definition).
We say '
surprisingly
' because you might think Japan should've just let the president fire off that tweet then take his lower tariffs.
So why didn't it?
Trump’s tweet suggested Japan’s investment would be 90% in America's favour, which presumably didn't go down too well among the voters who just dunked on Japan's ruling party a week ago.
Still, the lesson for other capitals might’ve been to
a
) offer big,
long-term
pledges in hopes of getting
immediate
tariff relief, then
b
) just let the president sell it how he wants. And that’s what the EU has now done (it’s staying notably silent on his claims that EU members are now “
agreeing to open up their countries to trade at zero tariff
”).
But maybe there’s another lesson on display…?
🌏
Stability
The president's recent deals with
Vietnam
*
,
Indonesia
, and the
Philippines
all landed relatively high at 19% or 20%. And sure, that likely reflects their own limited leverage plus a calculation that ~20% is probably manageable for their lower-cost export bases.
But it also reflects an assessment that whatever extra percentage point or two these leaders might’ve shaved off, it still wouldn’t be worth the risk of higher US tariffs from Friday, nor the bigger risk: more uncertainty. Hanoi, Jakarta, and Manila (plus Brussels too) all know that the firms they’re trying to lure need stability before they’ll invest.
Intrigue’s Take
So... is President Trump's strategy working? The US is now generating record customs revenues, and
could
double that share of federal revenue to 4 or ~5%. Plus there've been a few US factory announcements along the way, whether from AstraZeneca, LVMH, or UCB.
But at what cost?
Trade flows remain
relatively
resilient, the S&P500 has recovered to new records, and some big multinationals are seemingly spreading tariff costs across foreign markets rather than stinging US consumers and risking a presidential rebuke.
Yet… that resilience partly just reflects Trump’s strategy
reversal
(particularly his escalatory cycle with China). And those firms not passing tariffs straight on to US consumers are also the few giants with the wherewithal of global brand recognition, footprints, and margins.
So then there’s the fact that, instead of 90 deals in 90 days, we've now seen
four-ish deals in 118 days
(UK, Philippines, Indonesia, and now the EU): the China deal was more a de-escalation, while the Japan and
*
Vietnam deals are both still TBC.
So, Trump might claim
some economic victories
here (possible investments, market access, and higher protections for domestic producers) and there’ll be a victory lap if any more deals land this week (Brazil, Canada, and India are all in the mix).
But there are also the parallel drops in America’s global standing, and what this in turn means for broader US strategy: eg, those same Indo-Pacific swing states critical for any US competition with China will now see that same race in a new, sharper,
Liberation Day
light.
Sound even smarter:
A US appeals court is scheduled for oral hearings this Thursday into whether President Trump’s tariffs are lawful.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇹🇭
THAILAND
-
Peace out.
The leaders of Thailand and Cambodia have agreed to an "
immediate and unconditional ceasefire
" following peace talks in Malaysia today (Monday) after last week’s border clashes. We wrote about the border tensions
here
. (
Straits Times
)
🇮🇱
ISRAEL
-
Pause for aid.
Israel has announced it’ll temporarily pause military operations in Gaza to allow more aid in amid international outcry at the Strip’s humanitarian situation. (
BBC
)
🇨🇩
DR CONGO
-
Terrorists hit church.
An ISIS-linked group has attacked a church in eastern Congo, leaving at least 30 dead. It’s the second such attack this month. (
AfricaNews
)
🇺🇦
UKRAINE
-
U-turn.
After national protests and broader Western pushback, President Zelensky now wants updates to last week’s bill stripping Ukraine’s anti-corruption watchdogs of their independence. Under his new bill, two anti-corruption bodies would stay independent, though any Russia-linked employees get polygraph tested. (
Politico
)
Comment
: Where’s the line between avoiding foreign influence, centralising control, and undermining investigative independence? Zelensky found out last week. But in the process, he might’ve highlighted two things: first, there are clearly limits to his wartime aura; but second, Ukraine (unlike its invader) still answers to the people.
🇧🇴
BOLIVIA
-
Going up?
Inflation in Bolivia has hit a 30-year high ahead of its 17 August elections, as polling suggests economic concerns now outweigh political ones. No candidate is polling higher than 25%, so a runoff in October seems inevitable. (
Americas Quarterly
)
🇹🇼
TAIWAN
-
Here to stay.
An unprecedented recall motion has failed to unseat 24 ‘pro-China’ opposition lawmakers, after voters chose to keep their elected representatives at a special ballot over the weekend. There are still another seven seats to vote, and the ruling party needs six to flip to regain control of the legislature. (
Guardian
)
Comment
: The election night pro-unity messages from both President Lai and the KMT opposition suggest maybe a broad realisation that this campaign went too far at times, risking the kind of polarisation that ultimately benefits Beijing.
🇲🇲
MYANMAR
-
Summer sale on sanctions.
The White House is insisting a letter from Myanmar’s junta leader that praised President Trump and sought sanctions relief had nothing to do with Thursday’s decision to lift US sanctions on cronies close to the ruling generals. (
Irrawaddy
)
Comment
: The junta’s letter was responding to a message the US president first sent earlier this month — DC’s idea was to threaten Myanmar with 40% tariffs, but in doing so might’ve effectively gifted the first known US recognition to the coup leader who seized power in 2021, triggering a brutal civil war that’s still raging today.
Extra Intrigue
🤣
Your weekly roundup of the world’s lighter news
Aussie cops have charged a man for
stealing 53 right-foot shoes
from a mall.
US citizens can now
donate via PayPal and Venmo
to reduce US public debt.
A Philippine bride and groom have
tied the knot in a flooded church
after deciding they wouldn’t let heavy typhoon rains ruin their special day.
Irish authorities have issued
a dress code
banning tour guides from going nude.
And a Moroccan animal park has opened the world’s first zipline that flies visitors
right over the top of live alligators
. We’ve seen enough movies to know how this ends.
Diplo-beef of the day
Houari Boumediene Airport
What’s the easiest way to make a diplomat cry…
Maybe get their rank wrong? Parachute a useless political appointee into their embassy? Or there’s the Moscow method of (ahem) ✌️using✌️ your home’s restroom to show that Russian spies paid a visit.
Well Algeria is giving a bold new strategy a go: revoking airport fast-track privileges for French diplomats!
Why?
Algeria accuses France of obstructing Algeria’s diplomatic pouch (the official mail service connecting embassies to HQ) as part of an ongoing spat which escalated when Paris embraced rival Morocco’s plan to control the disputed territory of Western Sahara (Algeria backs a local independence movement instead).
Bonus fun fact
about those ‘diplomat’ airport queues: they can take longer than the regular queue, but some diplomats will just stand there and wait the extra 30 minutes anyway, lest any passer-by not glance their way and think
oooooh look they’re a diplomat
.
Today’s poll
Do you think President Trump's trade strategy is working?
📈 Yes, here's why...
📉 No, here's why not...
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
What do you think about this ICJ opinion on climate change?
😮
It's a major turning point  (27%)
🥱
Meh, the ICJ has no real power (69%)
✍️ Other (write us!) (4%)
Your two cents:
🥱
E.F:
“The ICJ has no real authority and no ability to tell anyone what to do, especially the big players like America and China. Overplaying their hand will just hurt their own legitimacy.”
😮
R.B:
“The edifice of justice is constructed brick by brick, and climate justice is no exception. The generations that care most about climate justice will use the ICJ ruling as domestic legal inspiration.”
✍️
D.D:
“It’s not that ICJ has no real power, it’s that no one is going to do anything meaningful about global warming because it requires real sacrifice.”