URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/is-there-a-genocide-in-nigeria
Title: 🌍 Is there a genocide in Nigeria?

Today’s briefing:
— Is there a genocide in Nigeria?
— A surprise Trump-Xi call
— The world’s most populous city
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. When we started Intrigue, one of our goals was to highlight the less mainstream stories, particularly from the Global South and from regions outside the wire service beat.
While I’d give us credit for surfacing some of these stories, I’d love to one day expand our offerings to longer-form writing on the dynamic stories springing out of countries like
Nigeria
(our top story for today).
As always, please let us know what you think of our content and what else you want to add to your Intrigue Christmas wishlist.
PS
— We’ll take a
Thanksgiving
break this Thursday and Friday, but will be back Monday!
Intrigue Insight: The Trump-Xi call
President Xi has used Monday’s surprise call with President Trump to
reiterate
China’s territorial claims over Taiwan as an “
integral part of the post-war international order
”, and invite Trump to Beijing in April (the US president says he’s accepted). Meanwhile, Trump’s own
read-out
doesn’t mention Taiwan, instead focusing loosely on trade.
Our quick take?
As the dust settles, there are several ways to view this call.
First
, leaders always have domestic audiences in mind (trade for Trump, Taiwan for Xi).
Second
, China’s reported initiation, last-minute timing, and read-out all paint the call as Beijing’s continued escalation in its spat with Japan over Taiwan, which we explored
here
.
But
third
, China’s read-out also goes beyond that
spat du jour
, calling on the US to join hands in upholding the entire post-WWII order (now implicitly threatened by Japan’s wary comments on China invading Taiwan). It hints at the kind of broader future Xi says China wants: co-existence among fellow giants (rather than joining a US-led order).
Then
fourth
, there’s the mystery of why Trump then promptly called Japan’s prime minister. Our best guess from that timing and relative silence afterwards is that DC neither wants nor can afford further escalation with China right now, so Trump might’ve nudged this particular US ally to cool it. We’ll keep you posted as further details emerge.
Eyes on Africa
There are all kinds of reasons why Nigeria might pop up in your feed, whether as Africa’s largest democracy (230 million people), its top oil producer, or one of the continent’s biggest economies (thanks to a recent recalculation that boosted its GDP by 30% — could those same economists pls come and help us “
recalculate
” our revenue here at Intrigue)
.
But realistically, Nigeria is now hitting our feeds because of the
ongoing violence
(300+ more children kidnapped from a Catholic school just on Friday), and
President Trump’s response
(declaring some of the ongoing violence a genocide against Christians).
So…
what’s going on?
With kaleidoscopic Nigeria hosting an absolute deluge of hyphens (ethnic-Fulani-Salafist-herder-nationalist-separatists!), it’s worth listening to each group’s words, starting with…
First
, there are ISIS-linked groups like
Boko Haram
, with a name roughly translating to the catchy “
Western education is a sin
”. It’s
a
) Salafist (purist
theology
), b) jihadist (violent
tactics
),
c
) seeking its own hardline state in northern Nigeria, and
d
) ruthlessly exploiting local grievances to expand: think poverty, repression, and resource scarcity.
To be clear,
the group openly targets Christians
: its late founder (Yusuf) called Christians infidels deserving jihad; his successor (Shekau) vowed to “
cleanse
” Nigeria of Christians; and the group has still used
convert-or-die
ultimatums under its current leader Doro (though Niger claims it killed him in an August drone strike).
To be clear again, Boko Haram also
kills vast numbers of Muslims who get in its way
, variously labelling them apostates, collaborators, and/or collateral damage.
Second
, there are
criminal gangs
(dubbed “
bandits
”), graduating from their earlier cattle rustling days to now carry out kidnappings, raids, and extortion across Nigeria’s north-west. Thriving in lawlessness and fuelled by arms out of Libya and the Sahel, the biggest bandit groups draw from the north’s ethnic-Fulani-Muslim-majority-herder-communities.
Absolute deluge of hyphens there, but
what do these bandits themselves say?
Their ransom
demands
mostly focus on cash, vehicles, and weapons
Their
victims
include anyone who might have cash, vehicles, and weapons, and
To the extent they frame their violence, it’s usually as “
revenge
”, though it’s hard to disentangle the bigotry when some attackers yell jihadi slogans.
Then
third
, Nigeria is also fighting long-running
separatist
movements, like the ethnic Igbo
nationalists
down south. This ‘Indigenous People of Biafra’ (IPOB) group targets state outposts in hopes of restoring the short-lived Republic of Biafra — Nigeria’s south-east is Christian-majority, though these separatists frame their hits in ethno-political terms.
Okay, then… what about
President Trump’s response
?
After (again) naming Nigeria a
Country of Particular Concern
on religious freedom, the US president has now
warned
Nigeria
to halt persecution of Christians or he’ll deploy troops to
“completely wipe out the Islamic Terrorists.”
Trump’s UN ambassador also hosted
rapper Nicki Minaj
on this issue in New York last week. And a senior State official just
told
Congress there are other options in the mix, like sanctions and military engagement (seemingly now in cooperation with Nigeria).
DC’s
objective
? To “
push the Nigerian government to take measurable steps that will improve security, accountability, and religious liberty.
”
For its part, Nigeria rejects the genocide label, but says it welcomes US counter-terrorism help.
Intrigue’s Take
So…
is there a genocide in Nigeria?
We founded Intrigue because, while some friends in the media might generate rage-clicks by pretending otherwise, smart people clearly can (and must) be able to hold multiple truths in their head at once. So we’d offer these humble truths:
First
, Boko Haram itself makes clear it is
genocidal
. It’s weird to pretend otherwise.
Second
, the West’s faith blindspot opens gaps for
populists
willing to use truth as red meat.
Third
, there’s often a rush in the West to identify which hyphen applies to which attack, then milk the corresponding righteousness, outrage, and clicks. Yet the reality is that even crystal-clear hyphens like Boko Haram’s Salafist-jihadism leave
broad-based devastation
, while criminal networks carry out many of their own atrocities against anyone with cash.
And that brings us to…
Fourth
, Nigeria tries to
shape its responses
to avoid exacerbating the hyphens — eg, it deploys mixed-ethnicity, mixed-religion units to
a
) promote national cohesion, and
b
) avoid playing into local grievances (like one group seemingly occupying the other).
But
fifth
, the numbers alone make clear Nigeria’s efforts just aren’t working: the bandit and jihadi toll for the first half of 2025 already exceeded
the entire toll for 2024
. So maybe the rest of the world just needed kidnappings, a rapper, or a rage tweet to pay attention?
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
Face Off
The U.S.–China relationship generates constant headlines, from skipped G20 meetings to negotiations that could shape Taiwan’s future.
Face-Off
is an award-winning podcast that cuts through the noise to deliver you the real story, with essential historical context. Hosted by Jane Perlez, longtime foreign correspondent for The New York Times, Face-Off is an inside look at the turbulent relationship between these two superpowers, the men in charge, and the vital issues that affect us all.
Tune into Season 3 today!
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇷🇺
RUSSIA
-
Talking stage.
It turns out US Army Secretary Dan Driscoll is
not-so-
secretly in Abu Dhabi for talks with an unspecified Russian delegation plus Ukraine’s military intelligence chief (Budanov), amid a renewed US push to end Putin’s war. Driscoll is reportedly working off the new 19-point peace plan that US-Ukraine talks whittled down from the more Moscow-friendly 28-point plan in Geneva over the weekend. Word is this new 19-point plan rebalances things towards Kyiv, though still leaves the spiciest details (like Putin’s territorial demands) for Trump-Zelensky talks. (
Politico
)
Comment
: In a familiar scene, Ukraine’s European backers are now scrambling to put on a united front and avoid being side-lined, with the UK’s Keir Starmer set to chair an emergency meeting of the ‘Coalition of the Willing’ today (Tuesday).
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
Dismissed.
A US judge has moved to dismiss two criminal cases against former FBI boss James Comey and New York’s attorney-general Letitia James after finding the prosecutor who brought the charges was unlawfully appointed. Most expect this saga to continue in another form. (
Politico
)
🇵🇰
PAKISTAN
-
Attack on HQ.
Nobody has yet claimed responsibility for Monday’s latest suicide bombing that left three frontier personnel dead in northern Pakistan. (
France24
)
Comment
: Pakistan is riding high after holding its own against India back in May, but these bombings are a reminder that Pakistan’s biggest foe is not India, but its own home-grown groups. We explored the Afghanistan-Pakistan dynamic of this
here
.
🇮🇹
ITALY
-
Lemme have a look.
Italian authorities have raided two Amazon facilities amid allegations China’s exporters might be using the US giant as a ‘Trojan horse’ to evade taxes. (
Reuters
)
🇲🇾
MALAYSIA
-
Social media ban.
Kuala Lumpur has unveiled plans to follow Australia’s example and ban social media for young’uns under 16 years of age from 2026. (
Independent
)
Comment
: This was why US tech giants first fought Australia’s proposal tooth n’ nail: the idea was always going to spread, whether on welfare, vice concerns, or beyond.
🇧🇷
BRAZIL
-
Plight risk.
Authorities arrested former president Bolsonaro on flight risk fears over the weekend, ahead of his prison term over an attempted coup. Bolsonaro later told a court he tried to pry open his ankle monitor amid a medication-induced paranoia. (
Folha
)
🇿🇦
SOUTH AFRICA
-
Family drama.
A daughter of a former president (Zuma) has filed a criminal complaint accusing her own sister (a member of parliament) of scamming 17 men into joining Putin’s war on Ukraine. The scam allegedly involved telling the men they were just heading abroad for bodyguard training. (
BBC
)
Comment
: And you thought *your* family reunion was gonna be awkward…
Extra Intrigue
According to the latest Polymarket trades, there are…
13%
odds of a
ceasefire between Russia and Ukraine
.
32%
odds of AI being named
the Time 2025 Person of the Year
.
And
49%
odds the centre-right’s Luís Marques Mendes will win January’s
elections for Portugal’s mostly ceremonial presidency
.
City of the day
Credits: By Adnan Ali.
Jakarta is officially the world’s most populous city (metro area), according to a newly released
UN report
. The sprawling Indonesian capital now comes in at a staggering ~42 million people, ahead of Dhaka’s ~40 million and Tokyo’s ~33 million.
Interestingly, Jakarta might soon be the biggest non-capital city, too. In 2019, the Indonesian government announced plans to move the capital to Nusantara, a new location in the Borneo jungle, due to concerns linked to Jakarta’s sinking, overcrowding and pollution. Though of course, those plans are facing plenty of hurdles too.
Today’s poll
If Jakarta is the biggest, which city do you think is the most underrated?
🇲🇽 Mexico City
🇵🇹 Porto
🇰🇬 Bishkek
🇸🇳 Dakar
🇰🇭 Kampot
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
If you could poach one world leader for your own government, who would you choose and why? (assuming full loyalty!)
🇨🇳
Xi Jinping (13%)
🇮🇳
Narendra Modi (4%)
🇲🇽
Claudia Sheinbaum (37%)
🇪🇺
Ursula von der Leyen (27%)
🇹🇷
Recep Tayyip Erdoğan (3%)
✍️ Other (write in!)  (165)
Your two cents:
🇲🇽
S.A.M:
“Claudia's responses to situations and other leaders show a firm and fair temperament with an astute intellect.”
✍️ S.C:
“None, thank you, mine are bad enough.”
Honourable
mentions
: Finland’s Alexander Stubb, America’s Donald Trump, Italy’s Giorgia Meloni, Canada’s Mark Carney, Ukraine’s Volodymyr Zelensky, and the prime minister of Barbados, Mia Mottley.