URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/israel-hits-iran-d4081f03fc28fb81
Title: 🌍 Israel hits Iran

Today’s briefing:
— Israel hits Iran
— How to get fake McNuggets in Russia
— A cashed-up quiz
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. I just had the fun job of letting 24 lucky Intriguers know they’re the winners of a signed copy of the acclaimed
In Praise of Idleness
by best-selling writer, humourist, and fellow Intriguer, Bradley Trevor Grieve.
I loved hearing back from some of the winners about Intrigue’s role in their lives, whether it’s helping write speeches for world leaders, helping push humanity deeper into space, or just feeling a bit more connected with the beautiful soap opera we call Planet Earth. My sincere thanks to you all for helping share Intrigue with friends, family, and colleagues.
Anyway, let’s get you briefed on
Israel’s big hit on Iran overnight
.
Nuclear bust-up
Israel’s Netanyahu (L) ordered strikes on dozens of targets across Iran overnight, including the head of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, Major General Hossein Salami (R)
Thought you could have a nice, relaxed, geopolitics-free weekend? Perhaps pop down to Home Depot if you get time? Wrong.
Following a day of mysterious security alerts for US and Israeli diplomats in the Middle East (suggesting they had intel something was up), Israel has now struck targets in Iran.
The dust is still settling
, but the strikes appear to have hit…
Nuclear facilities like Iran’s key enrichment site in Natanz
Military sites including Iran’s ballistic missile capabilities
Military leaders, with reports the dead include Hossein Salami (the head of Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps) plus at least two other top officers, and
At least two of Iran’s key nuclear scientists.
Even with the full picture still emerging, the scale of this operation appears staggering, with over 200 warplanes hitting some 100 targets. And Israel’s Benjamin Netanyahu is warning this will continue for “
as many days as it takes.
”
In response,
Iran has now launched ~100 drones
at Israel (no reported hits) and issued its own warnings that “
the strong hand of the Islamic Republic will not let them go
”.
So why’d Israel do this, and why now?
There’ve been a few drivers in parallel.
First
, the board of the world’s top nuclear watchdog (the International Atomic Energy Agency, or IAEA) had just dropped a
spicy finding
for the first time in decades, catching Iran acting in ways that make it tough to believe its nuclear program is just peaceful.
For its part, Iran slammed the IAEA’s finding
as “
politically motivated
”, while it also…
Announced a new uranium facility (likely already built but not yet online), and
Test-launched a banned ballistic missile with a two-tonne warhead.
But the IAEA
could
now refer Iran to the
UN Security Council
, which
could
reimpose sanctions that leaders eased under an Obama-era deal to curb Iran’s nuclear program (Iran’s enrichment levels remained stable under that agreement until Trump 1.0 withdrew).
And yet…
Intriguers will recall permanent Security Council members (including China and Russia) can veto pretty much anything. And guess which two are also IAEA members who just so happened to side with Iran on this latest IAEA ruling? Yep,
China and Russia
, who find common cause with Iran and North Korea in pursuit of a post-US-led world.
So there’s scepticism around whether the Security Council could/would even do anything.
Second
, and in parallel, Trump 2.0 has been trying a mix of
maximum pressure
and direct talks with Iran. But despite the occasional glimmer of hope, those
talks haven’t yet seen results
, and Trump’s two-month
deal-or-war
deadline expired on Wednesday.
Third
, this all played out while
US-Israel ties wobbled
:
President Trump
became frustrated as the Israel-Hamas war dragged on, undermining his election pledge to impose peace through strength, and
PM Netanyahu
got irked as his US ally side-lined him while negotiating directly with foes like Iran and the Houthis, who’ve both publicly yearned for Israel’s end. Bibi argued Iran was just stringing the president along while still pursuing nukes, and he’s now seemingly just dismissed a direct Trump request to not hit Iran.
Then
fourth
, there’s the rubble of
Iran’s proxy strategy
, which worked a weeeee bit like a nuclear triad — but instead of deterring everyone via nukes in the air, land, and sea (the triad), Iran sponsored and relied on groups like Hamas, Hezbollah, and the Houthis. And yet, those groups already pulled their triggers, and got massively degraded in response.
So it seems Bibi weighed up the four factors above, then decided to pull his own trigger.
Intrigue’s Take
Details are still emerging, but there are early indications these strikes might’ve:
a) set Iran’s nuclear program back decades, and/or
b) set the region on another escalatory path ahead.
Anyway, while everyone holds their breath, one way to assess these latest development is to consider
who wins and loses
here:
Netanyahu
will claim a win having defanged Iran’s military and nuclear program, and he’ll welcome this latest distraction from his woes back home. But his critics might also notch it all up as continued evidence of his destabilising over-reach
Iran’s mullahs
will be humiliated again, with a possible whack to their grip on local power, though they might also enjoy a
rally-around-the-flag
effect plus sympathetic noises from Moscow and Beijing about any violation of Iran’s borders
President Trump
might be peeved if not embarrassed that the Israelis charged ahead solo and upended his Iran talks (due to resume Sunday), but
maybe
Iran will now do a deal for sanctions relief if it’s got no nuclear program left as leverage
Iran’s neighbours
(like the Saudis and Emiratis) will tisk-tisk Israel’s strikes in public, but they’ll quietly cheer the knee-capping of Iran’s nuclear program, something they’ve long condemned as a destabilising force in the region
Ukraine
will probably count this as a win too, given it potentially reduces Iran’s ability to supply Russia with the drones Putin uses to attack Ukrainian cities, and
Both
Russia
and
China
will condemn these strikes on a sovereign country (Putin will somehow manage a straight face), but their press releases will also serve as another reminder of the regional limits to their own power.
Sound even smarter:
World oil prices have already spiked 12% in the aftermath of these strikes.
According to the IAEA, Iran was the only non-nuclear-armed power rapidly accumulating “
highly enriched uranium
” — you need 3-5% enrichment for nuclear
energy
, but Iran is stockpiling at 60%, just a short technical step from the 90% you need for nuclear
weapons
.
Overheard in the Intrigue chat:
(join in by sharing Intrigue with friends and colleagues using your unique referral link!)
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇨🇳
China
-
Pope names bishop in China.
Pope Leo XIV has appointed the first Chinese bishop of his papacy, signalling he’ll uphold the controversial Vatican-Beijing 2018 deal giving China’s Communist Party a say in who the pope can name as local bishops. (
ABC
)
Comment:
While this suggests continuity on China, Leo has pivoted on Russia, with his initial statements moving the Vatican away from Pope Francis’s ‘all parties’ vibes.
🇪🇸
SPAIN
-
PM apologises but rejects resignation calls.
Spain’s shockingly handsome Pedro Sánchez has apologised for the mounting corruption scandals rocking senior members of his Socialist Party, but he’s rejecting ongoing protestor and opposition calls for his resignation. (
Politico EU
)
🇮🇳
INDIA
-
Air disaster death toll climbs.
As emergency response efforts continue, the death toll from yesterday’s Air India disaster now stands at 290, including 241 on board and at least 49 on the ground. The cause remains unclear. Miraculously, one passenger somehow survived. (
CNN
)
🇩🇰
DENMARK
-
Alliance still strong?
The Danish parliament has voted overwhelmingly to grant the US sweeping access to three bases on Denmark’s Jutland peninsula. (
Guardian
)
Comment:
Before you ask… yes, the Danish parliament was basically ratifying a deal the Danes had signed long before President Trump started musing about seizing Greenland again. Still, the fact the Danes stayed the course against that kind of backdrop is probably a message unto itself: we’ll uphold our deals, you uphold yours.
🇮🇩
INDONESIA
-
Putin > G7, says Jakarta.
Shrugging off a personal invitation from Canada’s prime minister to attend the G7 next week, Indonesia’s Prabowo Subianto will instead visit Russia for bilateral talks with Putin (Jakarta says Putin’s invite arrived first). (
SCMP
)
Comment:
Prabowo won power last year on a promise to maintain Indonesia’s non-aligned stance, something he must feel means visiting Vladimir Putin twice in less than a year.
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
Court blocks Trump’s National Guard move.
A federal court has now blocked President Trump’s National Guard deployments to LA amid unrest around immigration raids. Meanwhile, security has forcibly removed and cuffed Senator Alex Padilla (CA, D) after he interjected with questions at a Los Angeles news conference held by Trump’s homeland security chief. (
Independent
)
🇲🇱
MALI
-
President 4eva.
Mali’s junta-run council of ministers has approved a draft bill that’d extend General Assimi Goita’s power for another five years without an election. (
Africa Briefing
)
Extra Intrigue
Three stories we couldn’t shoehorn in this week 🗞️
Lobbying:
Russian ‘
ersatz’ companies
(running local Starbucks and McDonald’s clones after the OGs withdrew) are nudging Putin not to let the originals back in.
AI:
A former OpenAI board member is
questioning OpenAI’s pledge
to build out its UAE pact on
“democratic AI rails”
, given the state’s non-democratic vibes.
Parades:
And Washington is preparing for a massive military parade tomorrow (Saturday)
marking the 250th anniversary
of the United States Army (the date is also President Trump’s 79th birthday).
From our sponsors
Thinking of Selling Your Home? This 1-Day Upgrade Adds Serious Value.
Protect your home and increase its value in one afternoon. HomeBuddy connects you with trusted, no-middleman installers who fast-fit durable gutter guards over your current system. With a 100% no-clog guarantee and no-hassle pricing, it’s a smart move for any homeowner planning ahead.
Increase Your Home Value
Map of the day
Credits: M. Franco / C. Casey / COSMOS-Web collaboration
A retired Middle Eastern diplomat recently quipped to us that they wished they could blast off into outer space, away from all the conflict down on Earth. And while we diplomats tend not to earn enough to blow a million bucks on the next Bezos Blue Origin flight, a multinational collaboration of astronomers (not astrologers) did just release the
largest ever map of the universe
, cataloguing nearly 800,000 galaxies.
Today’s poll
1) Animals feature on the currencies of how many countries?
1 in 22
1 in 6
1 in 2
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) What is the approximate value of all currency (M0) in circulation?
~ 5 trillion
~ 10 trillion
~ 20 trillion
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) What materials have been used to create currency?
Silk
Wood
Plastic
All of the above
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate