URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/israel-hits-hamas-in-qatar
Title: 🌍 Israel hits Hamas in Qatar

Today’s briefing:
— Israel hits Hamas in Qatar
— Go work for the Swedes in Turkey
— Street art of the day
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Some get their news from wire breaking alerts. Other folks, like me, sometimes get the latest geopolitical updates from our Intrigue Diplo Club WhatsApp community.
Take today, for example, when I learned not only about some reported military activity on the eastern Polish border and got insight into the latest analysis, but also scored a list of excellent doco recommendations for sick days.
You can sign up for the Diplo Club by referring us to your friends using your personalised link below. Anyway, onto another topic that made headlines today:
Israel’s strike on Doha
, Qatar to take out Hamas targets.
Number of the day
8.7 million
That’s how many locals Polish authorities told to shelter in place as jets shot down Russian drones that “
repeatedly violated
” Polish airspace. The numbers (~20 drones) and region (facilitating NATO-Ukraine transfers) suggest Putin is testing both NATO’s air defences and political response (Poland now wants formal NATO talks).
The latest from the Middle East
Well that was unexpected: around 4:00pm Tuesday local time in the ritzy Katara district of Qatar’s capital of Doha, an Israeli airstrike blew up a compound hosting Hamas leaders.
While Israel has signalled confidence it was a wipe-out, Hamas says none of its five dead were senior leaders. Right now, we just don’t know.
What was Hamas doing in Qatar?
Qatar’s political HQ used to be in Syria until a civil war falling-out with Syria’s al-Assad dictatorship pushed Hamas to relocate. There’ve always been reports both
the US and Israel tacitly approved
that move — and Qatar’s subsequent financial backing in Gaza — as a way to weaken Iran’s grip.
But of course, the Hamas October 7 attacks brought new scrutiny to Qatar-Hamas ties:
The Qataris
have (with the Egyptians) leveraged their Hamas ties to mediate ceasefire talks since the beginning, but
The Biden Administration
started to lose patience, pushing the Qataris to evict Hamas unless the group eased its ceasefire demands. By November 2024, Doha was saying senior Hamas figures had skipped town, though the office remained.
Senior Hamas leaders then apparently flew back into Qatar from Turkey and elsewhere this week, with Qatar’s PM urging them to accept the latest US deal: release all hostages in return for more Palestinian detainees and a US pledge Israel wouldn’t resume the war.
So then… why’d Israel strike?
The Israelis
argue
the attack was justified because Hamas
a
) led the October 7th attack on Israel, and
b
) claimed responsibility for Monday’s deadly Jerusalem bus stop attack.
For Israel, this ongoing
assassination program
is about holding Hamas to account, shifting negotiations in its own favour (surrender and return the hostages), and even just cutting Hamas out altogether: Netanyahu has urged Gazans, “
make peace with us, and accept President Trump’s proposal. […] But you’ve got to take these people out of the way.
”
Meanwhile,
Qatar
has condemned this all as a threat to its security and sovereignty, a “
blatant violation of all international laws and norms
”, and an escalation in an already volatile region. It’s also (along with much of the international community) flagged that these strikes targeting Hamas negotiators will undermine any prospects for peace.
But as always, one of the biggest questions is…
Did the US know about this?
The Israelis
say it was their idea and their decision, carried out by them alone. But Israeli outlets initially reported DC helped coordinate and ultimately even approved the attack.
Meanwhile,
President Trump
says he only found out from the Pentagon at the last minute, and tried to give the Qataris a heads-up but it was too late.
As for
the Qataris
themselves? They seem sceptical (and
pissed
), arguing
a
) they got no word until missiles were already raining down,
b
) local US defences swatted away Iran’s attacks back in June, but didn’t seem to lift a finger now, and
c
) the airstrike comes just days after President Trump
issued a “
last warning
”
for Hamas to accept his deal.
But that’d mean the US greenlighting a strike on its own major non-NATO ally, Qatar.
What now?
Hamas is citing the attacks as proof Israel doesn’t want peace, whereas the Israelis are blaming foreign-based Hamas leaders (far from the war) as the true obstacles at this point.
Either way, it’s hard to see Qatari mediation surviving these strikes. And from what we’ve seen of Hamas so far, it’s hard to see it surrendering now after digging in for so long.
Intrigue’s Take
Here’s a big picture trend we’ve observed: Israel’s remarkable
capabilities
have tended to mask debate around its
strategy
. Or to put it another way: from a raw
operational
perspective, hitting Hamas leaders in the heart of Tehran and Doha, or wiping out Hezbollah leaders via pagers, has left intel types everywhere agape. It’s jaw-dropping.
But amid doubts whether this latest strike actually killed the intended Hamas targets (and reports one of the dead was a Qatari security official), there might now be more internal
debate around the underlying strategy
: at what point (if ever) will Israelis assess that the broader blowback outweighs any Hamas hits?
But speaking of strategy, there might also now be some
introspection from Qatar
: one reason it hosts anything from (say) the FIFA World Cup and a major US airbase, through to British and Turkish forces and even the Hamas politburo? It hopes this quasi-Switzerland hub status might protect it from its Saudi rivals next door.
But of course, when just about everyone sees a foe hunkering down in Qatar, you risk the opposite happening, too: Qatar somehow just pulled off
the wild honour
of getting hit by both Israel
and
Iran within 11 weeks. As the dust settles, it’s a reminder of the challenges for any nation banking on a multi-aligned strategy in a multipolar world.
Sound smarter:
These strikes come after Israeli Defence Minister Katz threatened Qatar-based Hamas figure al-Hayya in June (“
you are next
”), and Israel’s top general (Zamir) reiterated the threat just last month: “
most of Hamas's leadership is abroad, and we will reach them as well
”.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
Pacaso
Former Zillow exec opens door to $1.3T market
Austin Allison sold his first company for $120M. He also served as an exec for Zillow. But both companies reached massive valuations before regular people could invest.
“I always wished everyday investors could have shared in their early success,” Allison later said. So he built
Pacaso
differently.
They’ve made $110M+ in gross profits to date by disrupting a $1.3T market. No wonder the early investors behind Uber, Venmo, and eBay also backed Pacaso. And unlike his previous companies, you can invest in Pacaso as a private company.
But only until September 18.
Invest before this opportunity’s gone for good
.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇳🇵
NEPAL
-
Protests escalate
.
The Nepalese army has imposed a country-wide curfew after youth-led anti-corruption protests triggered the PM’s resignation, followed by the burning of parliament and even politicians’ houses. (
Al Jazeera
)
🇪🇺
EUROPEAN UNION
-
We’ll think about it
.
No word from Brussels yet, after President Trump reportedly pushed the EU to hit China and India with 100% tariffs over their Russian oil-buying spree — Trump apparently offered to mirror any EU move. (
CNBC
)
Comment:
It’s hard to see the EU agreeing given the scale of its trade with China and India, plus the way Europeans have focussed on India as part of their broader diversification strategy. But if this idea goes nowhere, it’ll (again) raise questions around how serious Europe is — let alone Trump — about ending Putin’s war.
🇫🇷
FRANCE
-
Promotion.
President Macron has appointed his armed forces minister and close political ally, Sébastien Lecornu, as France’s third prime minister in a year. (
Euractiv
)
Comment
: It suggests Macron hopes
a
) Lecornu can succeed where others failed (cobbling together enough of a majority to survive), or more probably…
b
) even another short-lived PM is better than ceding more ground to populists at another snap election.
🇵🇭
PHILIPPINES
-
Cut us a deal?
Manila has halted its $5.6B purchase of US F-16 fighter jets, with its ambassador to the US blaming budget constraints. (
Straits Times
)
Comment
: Ambassador Romualdez was probably also too diplomatic to note the Philippines just signed a $700M deal to buy 12 jets from fellow US ally, South Korea.
🇲🇽
MEXICO
-
Tragedy.
A freight train operated by a major Canadian rail firm has crashed into a double-decker bus at a crossing outside Mexico City, leaving at least ten dead. Investigations are underway, though the rail operator has urged local drivers to respect railroad stop signs. (
BBC
)
🇮🇶
IRAQ
-
Freed.
An Iran-based group in Iraq has finally released Princeton PhD student and Israeli-Russian researcher, Elizabeth Tsurkov, two years after they kidnapped her in Baghdad. (
Al-Monitor
)
Comment
: President Trump tweeted the news, adding to a recent string of hostage releases under his administration. It’s unclear what (if anything) the group might’ve got in return.
🇮🇳
INDIA
-
Whatever it takes.
New Delhi is reportedly asking state-owned and private miners to explore sourcing rare-earths from rebel-controlled parts of Myanmar, to dilute India’s dependence on regional rival China. (
Straits Times
)
Extra Intrigue
The Intrigue jobs board
💼
Project Officer for Reform Cooperation @
Swedish Consulate in Istanbul
Senior Manager, Global Cultural Programs @
Smithsonian in DC
Engagement and Organizing Advisor @
Oxfam, Remote
Overseas Partnerships Officer @
Singaporean Government
in Singapore
Street art of the day
Photo by Intrigue
A member of the Intrigue team just spotted this in the streets of San Francisco
,
featuring a distraught Sam Altman (of OpenAI) pleading for
just
another $20B to finally reach Artificial General Intelligence (however you want to define that).
The meme-inspired street art hints at OpenAI’s mounting challenges, whether rivals poaching its top talent, or US states scrutinising its efforts to become a for-profit. If (as seems a real possibility) California hampers OpenAI’s pivot, it could be a mess given the AI pioneer’s backers have conditioned $19B on getting shares in a new company.
Anyway, hopefully we can all agree this street artist at least has some legit talent?
Today’s poll
Do you think the US knew of Israel's Doha strike in advance?
🚀 Yes, Israel wouldn't dare otherwse
❌ No, approving a strike on an ally is madness
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Which sport do you think has the most diplomatic sway?
🎾
Tennis (7%)
🏀
Basketball (9%)
⛳️ Golf (14%)
🏊 Swimming (1%)
🤸🏽Gymnastics (3%)
⚽️
Soccer (63%)
✍️ Other (write us!) (2%)
Your two cents:
⚽️
H.S:
“Follow the money.”
✍️
S.A:
“None. Sports are all about money, assuming there is anything more is naïve.”
⚽️ C.A:
“The Olympic Games! World leaders were praising Putin in Sochi 2014, and a week later he invaded Crimea with little consequence.”
✍️ D.B:
“If you're trying to gain favor with a foreign country, you have to engage in
their
popular pastimes. Could be basketball, soccer, Formula 1, or table tennis. Depends on the country.”
🎾
R.H:
“Soccer is much more popular, but at least tennis refuses to allow Russian and Byelorussian players to have their national flag beside them in the standings or mentioned in the tournament draw.”