URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/wednesday-01b8
Title: 🌍 Israel and Hezbollah agree to a ceasefire

IN TODAY’S EDITION
1️⃣ The Israel-Hezbollah ceasefire
2️⃣ Some intriguing jobs
3️⃣ Flag of the day
Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
When I served in the Middle East, one of the responsibilities in my ‘patch’ was watching the Syrian Civil War. What that essentially meant was that I had to understand who the main players were, what their interests were, and how shifting facts on the ground impacted their hands.
In that conflict, the various parties’ fortunes waxed and waned with each development, be it major Western support for the Syrian opposition (and its associated rebel groups) or the game-changing entry of Russia in support of Assad’s regime (which ultimately regained the upper hand).
What I took away from that experience was that the pendulum can swing very quickly in times of conflict. With that in mind, let’s get you the latest on the
Israel-Hezbollah ceasefire agreement
, which kicked into force just hours ago.
PS
- We’ll take a quick Thanksgiving break tomorrow (Thursday) and Friday, but we’ll be back in your inbox from Monday.
THE HEADLINES
China’s defence minister under corruption probe (again).
As Oscar Wilde might say, to lose one defence minister may be regarded as a misfortune; to lose two looks like carelessness. But three? According to FT, Beijing has now placed Admiral Dong Jun
under investigation for corruption
, following the same fate as Li Shangfu and Wei Fenghe before him. There were already questions about Dong’s future after he was skipped over for promotion to China’s top military body earlier this year.
Mexico president warns of retaliatory tariffs.
Claudia Sheinbaum has cautioned President-elect Donald Trump that slapping 25% tariffs on Mexican imports will do nothing to stem the flow of drugs and undocumented migrants, and she’s
threatened to respond with tariffs
of her own. Around 83% of Mexico’s exports go to the US.
Russia kicks out British diplomat accused of spying.
Moscow has accused a junior UK diplomat of
providing false information when applying
for diplomatic accreditation, flagging “
signs of intelligence and subversive work
”. The UK has denied all allegations and is threatening to “
respond in due course
”. Russia expelled six UK diplomats on similar espionage charges earlier this year. Meanwhile, Russia’s currency has hit a
31-month low
after being hit with fresh sanctions.
Volkswagen sells controversial Xinjiang plant.
The German auto giant has announced it’ll
sell its Xinjiang manufacturing plant
to a Shanghai government-owned buyer. The announcement comes amid flagging China sales, new EU tariffs on China-made EVs, and criticism of China’s treatment of its Uyghur minority in Xinjiang.
EU parliament to confirm new Commission.
The EU
Parliament is set to vote
on President Ursula von der Leyen’s new team today (Wednesday), likely paving the way for it to take office on December 1.
In Focus: Global Plastics Treaty (Sponsored)
Focus at Global Plastics Treaty negotiations turns to health
As we head into day three of Global Plastics Treaty negotiations delegates are diving into discussions to agree, or disagree, on the Treaty’s text. Conversations will include addressing the impact of chemicals used in everyday plastics on human health.
Strong and compelling evidence links these chemicals with heart disease, neurodevelopmental issues and fertility issues. As recycled plastics have been shown to contain even higher levels of worrisome chemicals compared to virgin plastic, there will no doubt be opposition to calls that recycling is the solution to the plastics crisis.
See the evidence
TOP STORY
Israel and Hezbollah agree to a ceasefire
Israeli leader Benjamin Netanyahu addressed the nation overnight. Credits: The PM’s office.
After days of rumours and hints, plus US declarations of optimism, it’s now official: the Israelis have agreed to a US (and French) brokered ceasefire with Hezbollah.
But first, some context.
Israel and Hezbollah (a listed terrorist group) have been trading near-daily fire since October 8 last year, when Hezbollah resumed rocket, drone, and missile launches into Israel in solidarity with the Hamas attacks on Israel the day before.
After dismantling most Hamas battalions in Gaza, Israel then increasingly shifted its attention north to Hezbollah in Lebanon this year, including:
Detonating thousands of pre-compromised Hezbollah
pager devices
Intensifying its
airstrikes
to wipe out most of Hezbollah’s leadership and much of its arsenal, and then
Launching a
ground invasion
into southern Lebanon.
It’s now been the deadliest Israel-Hezbollah conflict since 2006, with Lebanon copping most of the loss of life (3,700), damage ($3.4B), and displacement (1.2 million). Israel says its goal has been to return the ~60,000 citizens who’ve fled their homes due to Hezbollah’s daily rockets over the past year.
So here’s what we know about this new ceasefire deal.
Israel’s full cabinet approved it last night (Tuesday), and the terms are based largely on UN Security Council resolution 1701, which ended the last Israel-Hezbollah war way back in 2006. The terms include:
An initial
60-day
ceasefire (with hopes it’ll then become permanent)
Israel
will withdraw from southern Lebanon during that time
Hezbollah
will withdraw all weapons and forces ~30km (19mi) back behind the Litani River (where it’s supposed to have been since 2006)
The
Lebanese army
(smaller than Hezbollah) will try to fill the resulting border region void with 5,000 troops
The US will lead a
five-country coalition
to monitor the ceasefire, while the beleaguered UNIFIL peacekeeping mission in the area gets reinforced, and
Failing that, Israel retains the
right to strike
Hezbollah if it detects an immediate threat, while less immediate threats get reported to the above US-led coalition.
Notice anything missing above? That’s right, Hezbollah dropped its long-held demand for any ceasefire to be contingent on a ceasefire-hostage deal with Hamas in Gaza.
So why attempt this ceasefire now?
In his
televised address
, the Israeli prime minister laid out his three key reasons:
It’ll allow Israel to focus on
Iran
(which sponsors Hezbollah and Hamas)
It’ll allow the Israeli military to
replenish
its stockpiles, and
It’ll isolate
Hamas
(which can no longer count on Hezbollah’s support).
He also said Israel has now set Hezbollah back decades, and he’ll have been mindful of his own central bank’s forecast that this entire conflict could cost Israel 12% of its GDP.
Meanwhile,
Lebanon
’s caretaker PM (Najib Mikati) has long pleaded for a ceasefire given the devastation wrought on his people. And that ‘caretaker’ in his title is revealing, too: Hezbollah has blocked the formation of a government in Lebanon for years, so his interim title is also a neat reminder of Hezbollah’s dominance there.
As for
Hezbollah
? Its current chief (Naim Qassem) has stayed silent, other than noting a week ago he’d provided “
feedback
” on the US proposal. Based on the terms above, this ‘feedback’ seems to have been short-term capitulation in favour of long-term survival, which his supporters are trying to spin as a success — notwithstanding the fact that his last two predecessors (and most cadres) are now dead, and his group is now diminished not only in the eyes of Israel, but also critically in the eyes of rival factions across Lebanon.
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
So what next? There are two big questions right now:
first
, can this ceasefire succeed where the 2006 one failed? One big factor here is really around
enforcement
:
We’ve
written previously
about the difficulties
UNIFIL
faces in confronting Hezbollah, and it’ll need a major boost to turn that around.
Then there’s the beleaguered
Lebanese army
, which can’t (even if it wanted to) stand up to Hezbollah without risking yet another civil war in Lebanon.
The
second
question is around what now happens in
Gaza
. And the Israelis have reportedly now reached out to Turkey (which now hosts some Hamas leaders) for help in getting the ~100 hostages released and ending that war. But it’s still hard to see Hamas giving up the one source of leverage it has left (hostages), or Israel halting its operation before achieving its other stated aim of removing Hamas from power.
Meanwhile,
Iran
will be watching all this nervously. This initial Hezbollah ceasefire expires five days into the second presidency of Donald Trump, who’s now openly threatening to bankrupt a regime that — with Hezbollah and Hamas both on the ropes — is now looking more vulnerable than ever.
Also worth noting:
Both sides continued to trade fire right up until the ceasefire kicked in from 4am local time this morning (Wednesday).
The only Israeli cabinet member to vote against the ceasefire (hard-line minister Itamar Ben-Gvir) has
called
it a “
historic mistake
”, though he isn’t threatening to pull his party’s support from Bibi’s coalition.
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇰🇿
Kazakhstan
: Astana is
welcoming Russian leader Vladimir Putin
today (Wednesday) for Collective Security Treaty Organisation meetings later this week. The Moscow-led security group will pass the rotating presidency to Kyrgyzstan next year, though its influence has waned since Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine.
🇬🇧
United Kingdom
: London has
reportedly deployed troops to protect US airbases across the UK
after
multiple
reports of
unidentified drones flying nearby, according to The Telegraph. It’s not clear who’s flying the drones, though UK military sources haven’t ruled out possible “
sinister
” intent.
🇮🇩
Indonesia
: Local authorities have
foiled a plot
that would’ve seen over $1M in pangolin scales smuggled out of the country. The endangered pangolins, considered a delicacy in Vietnam and used in Chinese medicine, were set for transfer to China via Malaysia and Singapore.
🇨🇦
Canada
: The local immigration minister has said the government is planning to
reform Canada’s refugee system
, looking to fast-track refusals in cases that are unlikely to be granted. The Trudeau government, which faces an uphill battle for re-election next year, has also said it plans to cut immigration more broadly.
🇲🇱
Mali
: The local ruling junta has
pulled the plug on broadcasting network
Joliba TV News after a politician used it to criticise neighbouring Burkina Faso’s own military government. The junta jailed the same politician back in 2021 after he criticized Mali’s own military regime on social media.
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Some jobs brought to you by our friends at
Political Risk Jobs
:
Business Development Director @
Mango Group
in Tokyo
Senior Economic Policy Analyst @
Mango Group
in New York
Associate Director of Sales @
Delectus Partners
in London
Geopolitical Risk Consultant @
Asia Trade & Risk Consultants
in USA (Remote)
FLAG OF THE DAY
The Siberian town of Novy Urengoy is only home to 100,000 or so people but crucially, it’s also home to Russia’s gas giant, Gazprom. Settlement only began there in the 1970s, a few years after testing uncovered one of the world’s largest gas fields nearby.
And that might explain the town’s flag above, featuring a very
Angry Birds
-esque character guarding three flaming gas pipes.
DAILY POLL
Do you think this ceasefire between Israel and Hezbollah will hold?
👍 Yes, both sides have compelling reasons to stop
👎 No, the longer term issues remain unchanged
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
What do you think Bessent's first task should be?
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🔨
Tariffs  (10%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
💸
Sanctions  (7%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️
🤝
Trade agreements  (36%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
⚖️ Cut the deficit (45%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write us!) (2%)
Your two cents:
⚖️ R.L:
“Putting the US on a stronger economic footing gives it more leverage with economic manoeuvres for geopolitical interests.”
🤝
L.B.K:
“After
tarrif-ing the hell out of our biggest trading partners, might it behoove us to seek out fairer trade agreements.”
✍️
M.A:
“What he ‘should’ do is to actually direct the US budget to the benefit of Americans and the creation of quality public services, but that is a whole other story.”
Was this forwarded to you? We're a team of ex-diplomats producing a concise and engaging geopolitical briefing for 100k+ leaders each day.
It’s free to subscribe
.