URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/israels-deadly-hostage-rescue-operation
Title: 🌍 Israel’s deadly hostage rescue operation

IN TODAY’S EDITION
1️⃣ Israel’s deadly rescue raid
2️⃣ An Italian village full of candidates
3️⃣ Tweet of the day
Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
In amongst all the elections this year, you might’ve missed an obscure ballot that still has the ability to shape our world: last Thursday’s election of five new members to the UN Security Council.
Who won, you ask? That’s revealed a little further below.
But… there was an even
more
obscure UN ballot the same day. Per tradition, the UN chief
pulled a random country’s name out of a box
to determine the seating order in the UN General Assembly. This year’s country getting front row privileges? Yemen. Its UN seat is held by the internationally-recognised government based in the port of Aden (ie, not the Houthis).
Anyway, let’s get into today’s briefing, which leads with an update on
Israel’s rescue raid
, triggering jubilation back home, but anger and mourning in Gaza.
THE HEADLINES
Macron calls snap parliamentary elections.
The French president has
dissolved national parliament
after the populist
National Rally
(led by long-time rival Marine Le Pen) won nearly double his own party’s vote in the European Parliament elections. He’s hoping a snap election will blunt criticism that he’s lost a popular mandate before his term ends in 2027. Other eurosceptic and populist parties also made inroads across Europe, though the centre-right European People’s Party remains the largest player.
Israeli war cabinet member Gantz resigns.
Benny Gantz has
withdrawn his party from Israel’s unity government
after criticising Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s handling of the war. The move by Gantz, who’s seen as Netanyahu’s main political rival, won’t topple the government because Netanyahu still holds a majority in the Knesset. Gantz was, however, seen as a counterbalance to more hard-line figures in the government.
Putin preps for North Korea and Vietnam visits.
Local media reports are emerging that Russia’s president will visit North Korea and Vietnam
in the coming weeks
. Vietnam has refrained from backing or criticising Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, while North Korea has cheered it on and provided material support.
IMF official warns (again) of growing US debt.
Gita Gopinath, the fund’s second-in-command, has warned that high fiscal deficits in the US and China
threaten the world economy
, suggesting Washington has ample scope to rein in spending and increase taxes.
Iran approves six presidential candidates.
80 presidential hopefuls threw their hat in the ring, but the Supreme Leader’s hand-picked council only approved six of them to run later this month. Only one of them comes from the reformist camp. The candidates are
hoping to replace Ebrahim Raisi
, who died in a helicopter crash last month.
TOP STORY
Israel’s hostage rescue raid: joy and outrage
(L) One of the hostages (Andrey Kozlov) arrives in Israel; (R) rubble left behind in Nuseirat
Israel rescued four hostages in a Gaza raid over the weekend. We’ve pieced together what happened, and why it matters.
Israel received
intelligence
on the location of the hostages last month. Some of it reportedly came from the US, including imagery and signals intelligence.
Either way, it pinpointed the hostages in
Nuseirat
, a part of central Gaza designated a refugee camp after the 1948 Arab-Israeli war. It's now a densely populated concrete urban area, with tents also housing displaced families from elsewhere in Gaza.
So over several weeks, Israel rehearsed a rescue operation using life-sized
replicas
of the two apartment buildings where Hamas was holding the hostages.
And then, at
11am on Saturday
, a vehicle piled with mattresses and other household items arrived in Nuseirat. Inside were Israeli forces - fluent in Arabic - disguised as a displaced family from southern Gaza. Their plan was a daytime raid to maximise surprise - but that also meant the streets were busy.
The Israelis reportedly told onlookers they were renting
an apartment
inside - they then entered, killed several Hamas guards, rescued a hostage in a locked room, and exfiltrated her to a helicopter staging at a beach nearby.
Simultaneously, a second Israeli unit used a ladder to enter an apartment 200m away. Reports emerged that it belonged to
Abdallah Aljamal
, who wrote for local media. (He’s also
listed
as an Al Jazeera writer, though the Qatar-owned outlet
says
this was because he penned one opinion piece in 2019.)
When the Israelis entered,
a gunfight
broke out killing both Aljamal and his father (a local doctor) - one of the Israelis was hit and later died.
The Israelis then rescued the
three hostages
locked inside and bundled them into a vehicle. At this point, Israel says Hamas attacked the vehicle with rocket-propelled grenades, and the Israelis took cover and called for air support.
Israeli
helicopters and drones then opened fire
. Graphic footage and witness reports indicate this led to a high death toll in the streets and nearby buildings: Hamas says 274 were killed and 698 injured, while Israel says "
fewer than 100
" died. Neither source has distinguished between combatants and others.
This second Israeli unit eventually got the three hostages to the
evacuation beach
, near the US-built humanitarian pier (Israel and the US have rejected claims that Israel used the pier or any aid trucks for the operation).
The whole event, from first shots fired to the final helicopter lifting off, lasted around
an hour and a half
. And that's the clearest we can get around what happened. From there, as you can imagine,
claims diverge dramatically
.
In Israel, folks greeted the rescue with
jubilation
, bringing the total number of hostages returned via force to seven, across three operations (Hamas released another 100 hostages during November's brief truce).
As for civilian deaths,
Israel blames Hamas
, which kidnapped Israeli civilians, hid them among Palestinian civilians, and refused to return them. Israel also blames Hamas for opening fire on the Israelis escaping through a crowded street.
For its part,
Hamas
has described the events as “
brutal and barbaric
”, while claiming three other hostages also died (claims Israel rejects).
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
So zooming out a little, what does all this mean?
Hamas
still holds ~120 hostages (a third of whom are presumed dead) and will now inevitably take measures to prevent similar raids, while hardening its own negotiating position (the group said "
your captives won’t be released unless our prisoners are freed
").
Israel
is celebrating what one opposition figure described as “
a great light in the terrible darkness
”, though its own military concedes it can’t release all remaining 120 hostages the same way - one way or another, that’ll embolden Netanyahu, not push him back to negotiate.
And
Netanyahu
’s unity government has now split, with minister Benny Gantz exiting overnight. Plus, critics have noted Netanyahu’s availability for Shabbat-breaching photo ops with the rescued hostages, but not to meet the many angry families still awaiting news. Still, we don’t see this dislodging him from power any time soon.
So to answer our own question - what does this latest development mean? In a geopolitical sense, not a lot. We continue to see more of the same ahead.
Also worth noting:
Netanyahu drew comparisons with the Entebbe raid of 1976, when Israeli commandos rescued 102 hostages being held by Palestinian and German hijackers on a tarmac in Uganda. Netanyahu’s older brother died in that raid, which inspired a dozen subsequent films.
Israel’s Western partners - like the US, France, and Germany - have welcomed the release of the hostages. Others - like Egypt, Lebanon, and Kuwait - have condemned the high human cost involved.
A MESSAGE FROM NICE NEWS
Wake up to good news
Tired of negative news? Nice News filters through 100+ sources each day to send you the most uplifting and relevant stories. Join over 750,000 people who read their 5-minute daily digest and start to wake up a bit happier.
Sign up for free!
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇰🇬
Kyrgyzstan
: The leaders of China, Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan have remotely signed a pact to transform “
a vision into reality
” for
a railway connecting the three
. They released little detail on the project, which has been mooted for decades but has gone nowhere due to high costs.
🇺🇦
Ukraine
: US authorities have said Russia’s surprise offensive to seize Ukraine’s second-largest city (Kharkiv)
has now “
stalled
”
, after weeks of heavy losses. The update came as President Biden was in France over the weekend, finalising plans to use profits from $280B in frozen Russian assets to help Ukraine defend itself.
🇻🇳
Vietnam
: According to a Washington-based thinktank, Vietnam has increased the
pace of its island-building
in the South China Sea, which China mostly (and controversially) claims as its own. Vietnam has created 692 new acres of land since November, double what it created in all of 2022.
🇨🇴
Colombia
: President Gustavo Petro has announced he’s
halting the export of coal to Israel
, in protest at Israel’s actions in Gaza. Israel generates around 20% of its electricity with coal, and it sources around half of its coal from Colombia.
🇾🇪
Yemen
: The UN has confirmed that 11 of its personnel have been
detained by the Houthis
in Yemen, alongside employees from other international organisations. It’s unclear why the Houthis targeted these humanitarian workers, though the group sees itself as part of an Iranian-led “
axis of resistance
” against Israel and the wider West.
EXTRA INTRIGUE
🤣
Your weekly roundup of the world’s lighter news
An Italian village with a grand total of 46 residents has still somehow had
30 candidates
run in local elections.
An Ohio woman has surprised her father with a Guinness Record after secretly counting
his collection of 1,041 pinball machines
.
A hiker has discovered that China’s tallest waterfall is actually
being fed by a secret water pipe
.
A thick silver chain necklace has somehow saved the life of a Colorado man after it
stopped a bullet
.
And Australia has reached peaked Australia
ness
, after scientists found a tiger shark that regurgitated a
whole echidna
.
TWEET OF THE DAY
Twitter/@UN_News_Centre
The world just elected the five next members of the
UN Security Council
: Denmark, Greece, Pakistan, Panama and Somalia. But ‘elected’ doesn’t quite capture the vibe - each country was running unopposed this year, per arrangements they made with their home regions. That’s known as a ‘clean slate’, and it doesn’t always work out that way.
Anyway, these five new countries will kick off their two-year term on the Council in January, joining the Council’s five
permanent
members (China, France, Russia, the UK and US) plus five other temporary members heading into their second and final year (Algeria, Guyana, Sierra Leone, Slovenia, and South Korea).
DAILY POLL
Do you think the UN Security Council should have more permanent members?
🇺🇳 Yes, this country deserves a seat (tell us who!)
👎 No, it would just risk further gridlock
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Last Thursday’s poll:
Will you be following the EU parliamentary election?
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🙋
Yep, I live in Europe (21%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
📰
Yep, I'm not an EU citizen but it's important (52%)
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
👊
Nope, it's irrelevant (23%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!) (3%)
Your two cents:
📰
J.M.A:
“I’m interested in politics and what’s going on in major regions of the world. Europe’s elections will have an impact on economic, environmental and social trends in other countries.”
📰
M.M:
“It's the second most important vote in Europe this year after Eurovision!”
🙋
M:
“I’m in Hungary - we also have local elections on the same day so it’s even more interesting here.”
✍️
R.H:
“It's summer where I live. I'm going to the beach.”
Was this forwarded to you? We're a team of ex-diplomats producing a concise and engaging geopolitical briefing for 90k+ leaders each day.
It’s free to subscribe
.