URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/italy-weighs-bri-membership
Title: 🌍 Italy weighs up BRI membership

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Elections sometimes cruise around in threes, as if they’re Kardashians or something. The next trio of elections is this weekend in Mauritania, Thailand and Turkey. But fear not, dear Intriguer. We’ll be back in your inbox Monday to help get you up to speed. So in the meantime, get out there and have yourself the best weekend.
Today’s briefing is a 4 min read:
🇮🇹
Italy
might ditch China’s flagship infrastructure initiative.
🤝
Southeast Asian
leaders are still divided on Myanmar.
➕
Plus:
A tour of one of DC’s coolest embassies, how the papers are covering Liz Truss’s upcoming trip to Taiwan, and… celebrity spies.
🎧
Today’s Intrigue Outloud:
Are US lawmakers preparing to break the global economy?
Listen here!
🗺️ AROUND THE WORLD
🇦🇫
Afghanistan
:
A “large-scale”
locust outbreak in Afghanistan
is threatening the country’s already fragile food security, according to the UN. Six out of Afghanistan’s 40 million people are now on the brink of famine.
🇩🇪
Germany
: Berlin will go ahead with plans to
sell part of its biggest port terminal to China
’s major state-owned shipping company. Critics argue the sale is a threat to national security.
🇹🇭
Thailand
: Thai voters will
head to the polls
on Sunday (14 May). This general election is a crucial test for the country’s military leaders, who are currently trailing behind the opposition in polls.
🇺🇸
US
: President Joe Biden has flagged he might need to
cancel his upcoming international travel
if the US debt ceiling impasse isn’t resolved soon. Biden is scheduled to fly to Japan for the G7 summit next week, before visiting Papua New Guinea and Australia the week after.
🇮🇱
Israel
: UN chief António Guterres has called for an
immediate end to escalating hostilities
between Israeli and Palestinian forces. Guterres condemned the
“indiscriminate launching of rockets from Gaza into Israel”
and the
“civilian loss of life that occurred during Israeli airstrikes”
.
🇮🇹
ITALY | GEOPOLITICS
Italian PM Giorgia Meloni has a big decision to make
Italy weighs the pros and cons of China’s BRI
Briefly:
Italy is the only member of the G7 (a club of seven wealthy nations) currently involved in China’s flagship
Belt and Road Initiative
(BRI - a trillion dollar global infrastructure program). But there are
reports
Italy may quit.
Rome has until the end of the year to make a call
before Italy’s BRI membership renews automatically, much like that streaming subscription you keep forgetting to cancel.
Why’d Italy join the BRI in the first place?
📉
It was feeling the effects of a debt crisis at the time (2019)
🏗️ This made it tough for Rome to invest in much-needed infrastructure, and
🤝
The government of the day saw China’s BRI as the solution
So why’s it now thinking of leaving?
🤷
The BRI hasn’t really delivered on the promise of new infrastructure
😨
Public attitudes towards China have shifted, and
☟ Rome has faced pressure from the US and EU to re-think the BRI
Intrigue’s take:
Despite best efforts to find a middle ground, the world always seems to find a way to force a choice: in this case, Italy can either keep China happy (by sticking with the BRI) or keep the West happy (by ditching the BRI).
Given the BRI’s limited results in Italy, Rome’s decision really comes down to what
message
it wants to send. And that in turn depends on what costs it’s willing to absorb. It’ll be well aware of China’s willingness to impose economic costs on countries that don’t play ball.
Also worth noting:
Estimates vary, but one recent
Shanghai-based study
says China has invested about $1T across the 148 BRI member states since 2013.
Before becoming prime minister last year, Meloni said it was “
a big mistake
” for Italy to join the BRI.
📰
GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES
How different newspapers covered
: Former UK Prime Minister Liz Truss planning to visit Taiwan next week.
Links
:
Taipei Times
,
The Guardian
,
China Daily
.
Today’s briefing is sponsored by
Flaviar
Discover Fine Drinks from Craft to Big Brands
Founded in 2012, Flaviar is the world’s premium spirits club, with operations in the US and Europe. Flaviar offers a better way to experience fine spirits.
Order now.
🤝
SOUTHEAST ASIA | GEOPOLITICS
All ASEAN eyes are on Myanmar
ASEAN summit derailed by Myanmar violence
Briefly:
Concerns over Myanmar dominated talks during this week’s annual summit of leaders from ASEAN (the Association of Southeast Asian Nations).
The 10-member bloc issued a five-point peace plan for Myanmar (a member country) back in 2021, but the ruling junta has ignored it, using a
thermobaric weapon
(aka ‘vacuum bomb’) in
an attack
that killed 160 villagers last month.
And the violence hit home
on Sunday (7 May), when an ASEAN aid convoy in Myanmar (carrying Indonesian and Singaporean diplomats) came under fire.
Intrigue’s take:
ASEAN was built on a spirit of joint decisions, and not interfering in others’ internal affairs. That’s partly driven ASEAN’s passive approach so far.
But it’s an approach that’s now making less sense.
First
, it’s
Myanmar’s
actions that are now interfering with the
region’s
internal affairs: some 200,000 folks have fled to Malaysia, and drug and human trafficking is spreading too.
But second
, ASEAN has much more heft and wealth now than when it was founded in 1967. And that brings with it much more responsibility to act.
Also worth noting:
Malaysia’s PM shared
footage
of him urging fellow leaders to find a “new vision” for ASEAN, to better handle situations like Myanmar.
This year’s summit was hosted by ASEAN’s largest economy, Indonesia, which set the theme as
ASEAN Matters: Epicentrum of Growth
. Tensions in the South China Sea were also high on the agenda.
👀
EXTRA INTRIGUE
As ever, we present this weekend’s recommendations from Team Intrigue! If you’ve got:
10 mins:
Check out
Slow Chinese
, a free resource helping Mandarin learners keep their language skills up to date in just 10 minutes a week.
29 mins:
Listen to this episode of
EU Confidential
by Politico, to prep for this weekend’s Turkish elections and what’s at stake.
40 mins:
Watch this YouTube documentary on
ghost kitchens
, a growing phenomenon on food delivery apps.
🏡
EMBASSY OF THE DAY
Credits: Alan Karchmer/OTTO.
Norway established an embassy in Washington in 1906, a year after Norwegian independence from Sweden. But the ol’ embassy is now looking pretty, pretty, pretty good… thanks to recent renovations. Our favourite feature? The curved timber bearing wall, designed to mimic Viking shipbuilding.
DC residents can see Norway’s embassy and more during the
EU Open House
event tomorrow (13 May)!
🗳️ QUIZ TIME!
1) Which of the following celebrities did not work as spies or agents for the Allies/resistance groups in WWII?
a) Josephine Baker
b) Audrey Hepburn
c) Julia Child
d) Ingrid Bergman
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) Over the course of Fidel Castro’s life the CIA devised dozens of plans to assassinate the Cuban leader. One of these plots involved:
a) Poisoned socks
b) An exploding seashell
c) Poisoned toothpaste
d) An exploding gramophone
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) What was the name of the joint US-West German intelligence operation to decode the encrypted government communications of over 100 countries during the 1970s-90s?
a) Operation Matterhorn
b) Operation Weasel
c) Operation Earworm
d) Operation Rubicon
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Answers: 1-d, 2-b, 3-d.