URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/tuesday-3e7e
Title: 🌏 Japan’s Nissan and Honda team up to compete

IN TODAY’S EDITION
1️⃣ Why Japan’s Nissan and Honda might merge
2️⃣ Why Brazil just banned an Adele song
3️⃣ Stunt of the day
Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
I love dogs with names that could only be human names. I once lived next door to a golden doodle named Bruce. Growing up, a good friend had a dog named Andrew - always Andrew, never Andy.
When getting my own dog, I seriously considered Linda and Brenda, before settling on Wilma. So imagine my delight when I stumbled across
an article
about a manuscript written in the 1470s entitled
The Names of All Manner of Hounds
.
Since statistics suggest at least a few dozen of you will be welcoming puppies this holiday season, I’ve picked out some absolute bangers for your new best friend: there’s “
Pretiboy
” for the distinguished pup (but he might get beaten up in the dog park), there’s “
Haveagoodday
” if you want to win friends across your neighbourhood, or best of all, there’s “
Beste-of-all
”.
Serious offer: name your dog after any of these medieval masterpieces and I’ll comp any future Intrigue subscription for life. Speaking of amusing names, today’s briefing leads with news of a potential merger between Japanese car giants Nissan and Honda, or as it might soon be known - Nonda.
P.S
: Our last daily briefing for the year will be this
Monday
, but we’ll send a couple of surprises over the break, and will be back to regular scheduling from Friday January 3!
THE HEADLINES
Russia detains suspect in general’s murder.
Authorities say they’ve arrested an Uzbek citizen they claim
planted Ukraine’s bomb
that killed Lt General Igor Kirillov and his assistant in Moscow yesterday. Russia alleges Ukraine’s special services promised him $100k and travel to the EU for his help.
Syrian rebel leader to disband armed factions.
Rebel leader Ahmed al-Shara (who recently dropped his
nom de guerre
Abu Mohammad al-Golani) has pledged to
fold all of Syria’s armed rebel groups
under the authority of the local defence ministry. But the UN envoy to Syria has said the country’s conflict isn’t over yet, warning of violence between Turkish-backed groups and US-backed Kurds. Meanwhile, an advocacy group has told reporters it’s found
a mass grave outside Damascus
with upwards of 100,000 bodies.
Biden to announce probe into Chinese chips.
The outgoing Biden administration will reportedly announce a new national security
investigation into China’s legacy semiconductors
, which could result in additional tariffs and trade restrictions. Biden has repeatedly ratcheted up pressure on China’s chips sector given its possible military and other applications.
Negotiators near Israel-Hamas ceasefire.
A Palestinian official involved in the negotiations has told the BBC they’re in the “
decisive and
final phase
” of securing a hostage-ceasefire deal
. Israel’s defence minister (Katz) has expressed a similar sentiment.
More Trump-bassadors.
Donald Trump’s
latest nominations
include investment banker George Glass (his former ambassador to Portugal) for Japan, real estate tycoon Arthur Graham Fisher in Austria, entertainment wheeler-dealer Stacey Feinberg in Luxembourg, former CIA officer Leah Francis Campos in the Dominican Republic, and long-time friend and businessman Lou Rinaldi in Uruguay. Trump also nominated former football star and unsuccessful senate candidate
Herschel Walker
to the Bahamas, and Florida philanthropist and art collector
Nicole McGraw
to Croatia.
TOGETHER WITH MODE MOBILE
This Tech Company Grew 32,481%…
No, it’s not Nvidia… It's Mode Mobile, last year's fastest-growing software company according to Deloitte.
Mode’s disruptive $martphone has already helped consumers earn and save $325M+ through simple, everyday use. That led to 32,481% revenue growth between 2019 and 2022, and presence in 170+ countries. Turning smartphones from an expense into an income stream, Mode is disrupting the $1 trillion smartphone industry, like Uber did with taxis and Airbnb with hotels.
They've just been granted the stock ticker
$MODE
by the Nasdaq, and you can still invest in their pre-IPO offering at just $0.26/share. Friday is the last day that you can invest and receive your shares this year, don’t miss it!
Invest before 12/20 and earn up to 2X bonus stock.
TOP STORY
Japan’s Nissan and Honda team up to compete
Wires were on fire yesterday (Tuesday) after
news broke
that Japan’s second and third-largest automakers (Honda and Nissan respectively) might be merging.
Before we dive in, the ‘might’ above is actually kinda funny:
The two companies put out statements saying the news didn’t come from them, but their two statements also kinda confirmed it by being literally identical; and
Japanese media then
ambushed
the Honda CEO out on his run this morning, and he basically confirmed it too (though lots of specifics are still TBC).
Interestingly,
the Japanese government
seems to have played a behind-the-scenes role here, and has openly floated a possible Honda-Nissan merger since 2020. Why?
For a range of tech, commercial, and geopolitical reasons — our favourite Venn diagram.
First
, on the
tech front
, Tokyo has been open about where it sees the world’s auto-industry headed: just last month, it set a target (and offered help) for its companies to gain 30% of the ‘
software-defined vehicle
’ market by 2030 — they see the future not so much in terms of a vehicle’s brawn (electric vs gas), but more in its brains.
Second
, on the
commercial front
, closing the tech gap on AI, automation, and cloud to compete in a smart future requires
massive
investments now — and that’s tough for smaller players. So the merged automaker, with rumours of Mitsubishi joining too, would be the world’s third-largest automaker.
Third
, on the
geopolitical front
, governments are worried about their industrial bases getting eroded by state-backed competition from China, which just overtook Japan as the world’s top vehicle exporter after
sextupling
sales in five years. That spooks the West not just for jobs or revenue reasons, but because an industrial base is also what you need in the event of a war: in WWII, Cadillac switched to make tanks, GM made bombers, Oldsmobile made bullets, and so on (ditto for BMW in Germany, Mitsubishi in Japan).
So… will this possible merger work?
The market’s response hints at the challenges ahead: Honda shares sagged, while Nissan soared 24%. That’s because, while both automakers have challenges, Intriguers might recall only weeks ago that folks in Asia were googling “
Nissan collapse
”, after an anonymous executive warned the firm might only have 12-14 months to live.
So why would the stronger Honda — long preferring to go it alone — now change course and do this deal? We can think of three main reasons:
a) It’s bending to the reality that
bigger is better
in this auto race
b) While Honda has been late to the EV game, Nissan was Japan’s EV pioneer (
remember
the ‘Leaf’?
), and
c) Nissan has a
big manufacturing footprint in the US
, which is enticing for any foreign player looking for local options ahead of Trump 2.0 tariffs (even for an established manufacturer in the US like Honda).
But this won’t be easy
: there are fears of political backlash in Japan given the likely job losses from a merger (though they’d be worse if Nissan collapsed). And this joint push into the future of smart cars comes just as EV sales ease: early adopters already adopted, cash-strapped capitals are rolling-back incentives, and weary consumers are hitting pause.
So this is going to be one heck of a joyride.
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
One of the things we’re learning about
a smart car future
is that it’s easier for ‘smart’ to learn cars (Tesla, BYD, Waymo) than it is for cars to learn ‘smart’ (GM just pulled the plug on its self-driving start-up, following a similar move by Ford and VW in 2022).
The other thing we’re (re)learning is that companies can be similar to countries in some intriguing ways, like how they make and break alliances to survive: Nissan is now running to Honda after a long-running but messy partnership with Renault.
Also worth noting:
The possible Nissan-Honda-Mitsubishi merger, which builds on announcements in March and August, would basically consolidate Japan’s industry into a duopoly (Toyota has tie-ups with Subaru, Suzuki, and Mazda).
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇰🇵
North Korea
: The US says it’s now seen “
indications
” that
North Korean soldiers suffered their first casualties
while supporting Russia’s war against Ukraine last week. North Korea deployed as many as 10,000 troops to Russia earlier this year as part of a mutual security pledge.
🇬🇱
Greenland
: Authorities in Greenland have released Canadian-American anti-whaling activist Paul Watson after
initially arresting him over Japanese allegations that he damaged a whaling ship in 2010
. Greenland is an autonomous territory of Denmark, which has no extradition treaty with Japan and made the final call not to hand Watson over.
🇦🇺
Australia
: The UK is hoping to convince
Australia to join its Global Combat Air Programme
to co-develop a supersonic fighter with Japan and Italy by 2035, according to the WSJ. Australia’s participation could help bring down costs and expand the jet’s future clientele.
🇦🇷
Argentina
: The Italian government has granted Argentine President
Javier Milei Italian citizenship
(on account of his three Italian grandparents) during a visit to Rome to meet his counterpart Giorgia Meloni. The reports have irked those opposed to Italy’s ancestry-focused citizenship rules.
🇳🇬
Nigeria
: Authorities have
arrested nearly 800 people
allegedly involved in an online romance scam ring based in Lagos. The accused — including nationals of Nigeria, China, and the Philippines — allegedly targeted potential victims in Europe and the Americas.
A message from our sponsor
Call for International Affairs Experts
Join a study exploring how features of foreign aid for peace and conflict resolution influence its appeal. Designed for international affairs experts, the survey presents hypothetical aid offers to assess decision-making. Participants include diplomats and senior researchers.
Register your interest here.
EXTRA INTRIGUE
This week in
geopolitics x pop culture
:
A
🇧🇷
Brazilian judge has ordered Adele
to pull her song ‘
Million Years Ago
’ from streaming services amid a plagiarism court case. Brazil is a signatory to the 1886 Berne Convention protecting intellectual property.
🏴󠁧󠁢󠁳󠁣󠁴󠁿
Scotland
will
ban popular messaging apps like WhatsApp
on government devices after an inquiry found it’s too easy to delete messages (aka evidence).
And the
🇫🇷
French
company behind the latest
Paddington Bear
film (a symbol of
Britishness
abroad) has pledged to resist pressure to
Americanise the stuffed animal
to maximise box office results.
STUNT OF THE DAY
Florentine Mayor Sara Funaro, pictured in the left panel. Credits: Sara Funaro via Instagram.
Nobody’s getting into the festive cheer more than the mayor of Florence, Sara Funaro.
She channelled her inner Sigourney over the weekend, repelling down the 13th century town hall while rocking a red and green elf outfit. Once firmly on the ground, she handed out candy to the gawking pre-positioned children as part of a Christmas PR stunt (literally).
Funaro now joins a long tradition of eye-catching political Christmas moves, like
Boris Johnson’s 2023 Christmas card
in a full Santa suit perched atop a ladder, or this pic of Germany’s Angela
Merkel ironing her gift wrapping paper
for some reason.
DAILY POLL
What do you think is the way to win the global auto race?
🛍️ Mergers and acquisitions
🏛️ State subsidies and incentives
👨‍💻 More R&D for better products
🚧 Tariffs and other restrictions
✍️ Other (Write Us!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
How long do you think Trudeau has left?
(
since yesterday’s briefing, Trudeau has reportedly acknowledged current difficulties but hasn’t yet indicated what he plans to do
)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
👋
3 hours
(4%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
😮
3 days
(11%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️
😬
3 weeks
(26%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
😒
3 months
(49%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
😍
3 years
(6%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write us!)
(3%)
Your two cents:
😒
R.J.C:
“Trudeau won't resign on his own accord and there is no mechanism in the Canadian parliamentary system to remove a party leader outside the ballot box. Opposition parties will have to wait until at least March, the next opportunity to bring forward a non-confidence motion. That said, only one of the three opposition parties has the cash to run a campaign."
✍️ R.D:
“3 lettuces. Seriously though, at this stage nobody with any ambition for a future in politics will want to replace him even if he did resign.”
😬
G.H:
“As someone IN THE KNOW, ahem, to a small degree, and having been involved in party stuff since ‘85, I personally think he will announce retirement from politics after New Year’s. This gives the party time to have a convention in spring, slap someone like Carney in as new leader, run up to election, fail miserably and blame it on the new guy.”
Was this forwarded to you? We're a team of ex-diplomats producing a concise and engaging geopolitical briefing for 100k+ leaders each day.
It’s free to subscribe
.