URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/japan-philippines-sign-historic-defence-deal-shared-alarm-china
Title: 🌍 Japan and the Philippines sign historic defence deal in shared alarm over China

IN TODAY’S EDITION
1️⃣ Why Japan and the Philippines just signed a major treaty
2️⃣ Zuck cruises Italy
3️⃣ Auction of the day
Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Governments are absolutely fire-hosing cash at AI right now to seize that early-mover advantage (plus avert the vulnerability that comes with getting left behind).
So I was intrigued to see Goldman recently drop a
31-page report
on the subject, asking a juicy question: is the hype around AI justified?
And interestingly, the report’s answer is kinda mixed: some of the gurus see only limited upside, arguing the tech just can’t solve the kinds of problems that might justify the massive costs. But others are more optimistic, even if AI’s “
killer application
” hasn’t yet appeared.
As for today’s briefing? We’ll get you up to speed on
why Japan and the Philippines just signed a historic treaty
.
THE HEADLINES
NATO summit kicks off.
NATO leaders are in Washington today (Tuesday) to kick off a
three-day summit
marking the alliance’s 75th anniversary. Word is there’ll be further announcements to support Ukraine, including establishing a unified command post in Germany to manage international support. Ukrainian President Zelensky himself is also set to attend, hoping to secure more air defences after Russia’s daytime missile attack on a children’s hospital in Kyiv yesterday.
Australia accuses China of hacking (again).
The statement by Australia’s signals intelligence agency describes
“
malicious cyber operations
”
conducted by China-based hacker group
Advanced Persistent Threat 40
(APT40) for China’s Ministry of State Security. Australia’s fellow members of the Five Eyes intelligence pact (US, UK, Canada, and New Zealand) - plus Germany, Japan, and South Korea - all backed Canberra’s claim.
Macron asks prime minister to remain as caretaker.
French President Emmanuel Macron has
refused to accept the resignation
of Prime Minister Gabriel Attal, asking him instead to remain until the post-election picture settles (which could take a while…). Sunday’s results delivered a deadlock for French politics, with neither the left, right, nor centre coming close to a majority (though a leftist coalition won the biggest share of seats).
When Modi met Putin.
Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi and Russian President Vladimir Putin have really
packed on the PDA
during their meeting in Moscow, with the Indian leader hoping their talks will “
go a long way in further cementing the bonds of friendship
” between the two countries. This is Modi’s first visit to Russia since Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine.
TOP STORY
Japan and the Philippines sign historic defence deal in response to China
While many of us perhaps kicked off our week with a nice little trip down to Home Depot or a surprisingly productive sync with Barry from sales, ministers from Japan and the Philippines used their Monday to
sign
a major defence treaty in Manila’s Malacañan Palace: it’s called a
‘Reciprocal Access Agreement’
.
And we’ve dug through the
31-page document
so you don’t have to. The treaty:
Allows Philippine troops to deploy to Japan (and vice versa) for “
cooperative activities
”
Signs both countries up for joint combat exercises, and
Lets them wear each other’s uniforms
.
The two kicked off
formal negotiations
last November in Tokyo, dropped hints of progress at this year’s Shangri-La Dialogue in Singapore, then did a formal line-by-line reading on June 11th (virtually, of course, because it’s 2024).
And that’s remarkably quick for these types of negotiations.
Why the rush?
Both countries are worried about China
:
Beijing claims 90% of the South China Sea, shrugging off an international
ruling
against it, not to mention rival claims by several more proximate countries like the Philippines (which brought the suit).
Japan also has its own territorial dispute with China (the Senkakus), plus broader jitters both about China’s assertiveness, and its designs over waterways that carry (for example) 80% of Tokyo’s energy imports.
As for
China
, it bases its claims on “
historic rights
” (a concept rejected by the above court), but
President Xi’s interests
are likely broader. He sees value in:
Controlling maritime trade routes that are vital to China’s economy
Managing the area’s vast fishing and energy resources
Expanding China’s sense of security by pacifying its periphery, and
Testing US commitment to its allies like the Philippines.
So against that backdrop,
this Japan-Philippines treaty is a BFD
.
For Manila
, it comes amid what President Marcos Jr
called
China's
“illegal, coercive, aggressive and deceptive actions”
, which culminated in last month’s
footage
of sailors ramming and threatening Philippine resupply ships with axes.
So Marcos will be hoping that the presence - of even possibility - of Japanese troops nearby will add to existing efforts at encouraging China to back off.
As for Tokyo
, the benefits are similar: the deal further stitches Japan into the US-led ‘
latticework
’ of countries seeking to balance China.
It probably also helps
Japan manage its own grim legacy
in the region, including its WWII occupation of the Philippines. So this pact is a bit of a friendship bracelet, eight decades later.
But China
, which has its own history of occupation by Japan, is still only too happy to refresh everyone’s memories. Responding to yesterday’s treaty signing, Beijing’s
foreign ministry
said
“
Japan bears serious historical responsibilities for its aggression and colonial rule over the Philippines and other Southeast Asian countries during WWII.
”
The ministry went on to add that
“
the Asia-Pacific region does not need any military bloc, still less groupings that incite bloc confrontation or
a new Cold War
.
”
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
That last line gets to the heart of it: what the US describes as a “
latticework
” of countries responding to China’s behaviour, Beijing prefers to label as “
blocs
” or “
cliques
” seeking to “
instigate
a new cold war
”.
Diplomats love their jargon, but the idea behind a ‘
latticework
’ is that it goes beyond the region’s traditional ‘
hub and spokes
’ model, which long saw individual countries forge defence ties with the US (not with each other).
Rather, this emerging ‘
latticework
‘ means
more US partners are now forging ties
among themselves: the Quad, AUKUS, the first-ever
Japan-Korea-US
and
Japan-Philippines-US
summits, and various reciprocal access agreements with Japan, the Philippines, and others.
That’s all just in the last few years (!), and often involves
doing the once unthinkable
: whether that’s the US sharing its nuclear propulsion secrets (AUKUS), India joining a US-aligned security dialogue (the Quad), or Korea and the Philippines finding a way to trust their former occupiers again (Japan).
The result
, in theory at least, is a more diversified, more integrated, and more resilient “
latticework
” of countries, better able to withstand the sense of inevitability and asymmetry they get when facing China one-on-one.
The result is also, of course, Beijing’s displeasure at each new addition.
Also worth noting
:
The Philippines is in defence talks with France and Canada too.
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇰🇷
South Korea
: Samsung’s biggest trade union has begun a
three-day strike action
to demand better pay and conditions. The firm, now the world’s second-largest chip-maker (after Taiwan’s TSMC), says this strike will have no impact on “
business
”, though the union itself says the strike has disrupted production.
🇧🇾
Belarus
: Chinese troops
landed in Belarus over the weekend
to participate in joint military exercises with the Russian ally until 19 July. The drills, only miles from Ukraine and the EU/NATO border, are kicking off just as NATO leaders mark the alliance’s 75th anniversary in the US.
🇮🇩
Indonesia
: At least 11 people have died after
heavy rains triggered a landslide
on the Indonesian island of Sulawesi. The casualties occurred in and around an unlicensed gold mine, which are relatively common across the mineral-rich country.
🇪🇨
Ecuador
: A court has ruled that pollution is
violating the fundamental rights of the Machángara River
, which passes through the capital, Quito. The ruling is based on an unusual article in Ecuador’s constitution that grants some rights to natural features.
🇸🇾
Syria
: After years of international isolation over his regime’s killing of hundreds of thousands of his own people,
President Bashar al-Assad has now scored an invite
to meet Turkish President Tayyip Erdogan “
any time
”. Erdogan’s recent warmer rhetoric towards the Syrian autocrat has worried many of the three million Syrian refugees now living in Turkey.
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Here’s what people googled yesterday
🇮🇹
Italians
searched for ‘
Mark Zuckerberg
’ after the tech billionaire’s
$300M mega yacht
was seen sailing along the Italian coast.
Folks in the
🇺🇸
US
googled ‘
Houston weather
’ as
Hurricane Beryl
hit the southern US yesterday (Monday), triggering a record 110+ US tornado warnings and leaving at least seven dead.
🇳🇿
New Zealanders
looked for ‘
Lulu Sun
’ after she made history as the
first Kiwi woman
to reach the Wimbledon singles quarterfinal (shortly after she switched her affiliation to NZ from Switzerland).
AUCTION OF THE DAY
Credits: Geoffroy Van Der Hasselt/AFP.
While most folks in France spent their Sunday delivering a consequential (if confusing)
parliamentary election result
, one mystery shopper instead headed south of Paris to an auction house in Fontainebleau. And once they got there, they splashed a cool $1.8M on a stunning pair of pistols that once belonged to Napoleon Bonaparte.
Legend has it that Napoleon tried to turn these very pistols upon himself in 1814, after foreign forces defeated his army and occupied Paris. But his squire had already removed the gunpowder, thus earning himself the artefacts as a gift for his loyalty.
Sunday’s sale not only comes with a ritzy case, but also a unique caveat: just a day before the pistols went under the hammer, the French government formally declared them national treasures, meaning a) Paris now has 30 months to make an offer to the new owner and, b) the pistols can only leave France temporarily.
DAILY POLL
Do you think this Japan-Philippines treaty will make any difference?
🌐 Yes, collectively all these actions will help deter China
❌ No, China wants regional control and will persevere
✍️ Other, write in!
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Which of the following do you think is the key for a successful government?
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🧭
Vision (9%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 🕊️ Unity (12%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️
🎯
Execution (35%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🤝
Ability to collaborate with other parties (41%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!) (3%)
Your two cents:
🤝
M.K.G:
“At least in a democracy, you can have a vision, but not be able to execute it unless there is some sort of collaboration. Collaboration breeds unity to some degree.”
🎯
G.K:
“Nothing happens if the party in power can't execute any of their programs.”
🧭
J:
“We have problems with our government because they only seem to care for the immediate elections, not thinking in the medium or long term.”
✍️
G.A:
“If your country uses a first-past-the-post system, then you should focus on unity, as is the case for US politics. However, in countries that have a proportional representation system, they'd be wiser to maintain balanced positions so as to form coalitions.”
Was this forwarded to you? We're a team of ex-diplomats producing a concise and engaging geopolitical briefing for 100k+ leaders each day.
It’s free to subscribe
.