URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/let-games-begin
Title: 🌍 Let the games begin

IN TODAY’S EDITION
1️⃣ 5 geopolitical vibes at the Paris Olympics
2️⃣ Jets scramble in the Arctic
3️⃣ Hideout of the day
Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
We’re delighted to announce that we recently acquired Lykeion, the excellent macro and geopolitics-focused media company. Our plan is to slowly integrate their incredible library of evergreen briefings into a knowledge base for all Intriguers.
In the meantime,
if you’re a Lykeion reader and this is your first taste of International Intrigue, welcome!
We’re not ones to toot our own horn, so we’ll let Tim, the co-founder of Lykeion do it… “
Everyone here at Lykeion has been reading Intrigue since their launch two years ago. We’re not just blowing smoke; this is the only daily newsletter we subscribe to and is easily the best geopolitically focused content you’ll read throughout the week”.
(Awww shucks, Tim!)
There are now almost 115,000 Intriguers, and yet it still feels like the same intimate community as always. For that, we say thank you. Don’t forget to keep sending us your thoughts, and if you love what we do and want to help us keep it free, consider telling your friends about us!
P.S. Today’s briefing focuses on the
geopolitics of the Olympics
which, despite being absolutely swamped by the news cycle, begin this Friday!
THE HEADLINES
Kamala Harris now presumptive nominee.
The US vice president is now on track to
win the Democratic Party’s nomination
after securing the backing of a majority of party delegates. Her campaign also raised a record-breaking $81M in the 24 hours after President Biden withdrew his candidacy and endorsed Harris on Sunday. Harris will make her campaign debut in Milwaukee today (Tuesday).
US Secret Service chief testifies on Trump shooting.
Kimberly Cheatle has told a
House committee
that the assassination attempt on Donald Trump was “
the most significant operational failure at the Secret Service in decades
”. Lawmakers from both sides of the aisle ended up calling for Cheatle to step down, frustrated by her vague answers.
Rival Palestinian factions make peace in China?
China-based media outlets are reporting that rival Palestinian factions Hamas and Fatah (plus ~12 smaller groups) have
signed a declaration on
“
ending division and strengthening Palestinian unity
”
- the reported deal pledges to work towards a unity government for the Palestinian territories.
Hungary barred from hosting next EU summit.
The EU’s outgoing top diplomat, Josep Borrell, has
barred Hungary from hosting the bloc’s next summit
of foreign and defence ministers, citing Prime Minister Orbán’s ties with Russian President Putin. The meeting will now be held in Brussels instead.
Wiz rejects Google acquisition, sets sights on IPO.
Israeli-founded cybersecurity firm Wiz has
walked away from Google’s $23B takeover bid
, announcing it’ll continue with its original IPO plans instead. The deal would’ve been the biggest acquisition in Google’s history.
TOP STORY
Five geopolitical vibes at the Paris Olympics
Five rings to rule them all
As 10,500 athletes from 200 countries and regions head to Paris for the 2024 Summer Olympics, the organisers really really want the world’s largest sporting event to be free of politics and geopolitics.
And to that, we say
bon chance
. Here are five ways these Olympics will again get geopolitical, if they’re not already (they are). And it all starts right in…
The Olympic DNA
The
ancient games
began among rival city-states who, when not busy warring among themselves, used the event to spread Hellenistic culture across the region.
Fast forward to 1896, and the
French aristocrat
who rebirthed the Olympics said he was moved by his own wartime trauma to try mending ties with sports.
Then fast-forward again to
2024
, with a quarter of the world’s folks now caught in ~55 conflicts, plus Paris itself on the highest terror alert. And against that kind of backdrop, we’re gonna need
a lot
of rhythmic gymnastics. So let’s look at…
The Olympic Truce
Since 1992, the UN General Assembly has called for an ‘
Olympic Truce
’ during each event, but
Russia
has breached it around the games in 2008 (seizing Georgian territory), 2014 (annexing Crimea) and 2022 (invading broader Ukraine).
The latter got Russian and Belarusian athletes
sanctioned
, so they can now only compete as
neutrals
(no flags or anthems - Putin
lost
his appeal this year). Even the UN’s latest ‘Olympic Truce’ only passed on a vote (rather than consensus) after Russia sought unsuccessfully to tweak the text in its own favour.
Meanwhile, organisers have resisted calls for sanctions on
Israeli
athletes over the war in Gaza, though they’re bracing for protests and have upped security since the 1972 terrorist attack against the Israeli team in Munich.
Then that brings us to…
Who hosts
The decision whether to bid for hosting rights is a tricky one: it’s the ultimate
global spotlight
to showcase a country’s power, values, culture, investability, and beyond. Reagan (for example) used the 1984 LA games to push back on claims of US decline, and Macron is arguably making a similar statement in 2024.
But hosting is also costly, and can aim a
global microscope
on your own issues, raising questions around whether others will turn up
:
we saw (for example) duelling Cold War boycotts, plus boycotts of Beijing’s 2022 opening ceremony.
Foes can also
disrupt
the games to make you look bad - eg, French intelligence has already accused Azerbaijan of seeking to foment domestic resistance to the games online, presumably in retaliation for France's support for rival Armenia.
And then there’s…
Who plays
Simply
turning up
can make a statement, like when the two rival Koreas marched together - and even fielded an ice hockey team together - in 2018. Or sometimes it’s
a post-win gesture
, like the South Korean soccer player who lost his 2012 medal over his sign claiming sovereignty over the Dokdo-Takeshimas.
And this year, you can also look at
who’s
not
playing
: an Algerian judoka got banned for a decade back in 2021 after refusing to compete against an Israeli.
Then of course, there’s…
Who wins
A single medal can
inspire not just a nation
, but millions abroad - take Morocco’s first gold medallist (Nawal El Moutawakel), who won the first-ever 400m women’s hurdles in 1984 in a breakthrough for women across the region.
Major rivalries
can also play out in a single match-up, like the infamous 1956 Hungary-USSR water polo match that left blood in the pool, just weeks after Soviet tanks rolled into Budapest (the Hungarians took gold).
And of course, major rivalries can also play out in the
total medal tally
: China invested heavily to ensure its first overall win coincided with its Beijing games in 2008, capping off China’s big ‘coming of age’ moment on the world stage.
But as China-US ties have soured, and the two powers now openly compete for international influence, more folks will (again) see that total medal count as a proxy for broader systemic competition: ie, “
my system is better than yours
”.
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
We’re barely scratching the surface here, but let’s scratch once more:
Given the above stakes, you can bet Paris 2024 will be full of
spies
. Yes, spies. Many will be playing ‘
defence
’, whether it’s the ‘minders’ from more reclusive regimes trying to prevent defections from among their athletes, or the local counter-terrorism folks trying to keep the city safe.
But you can also bet there’ll be spooks there playing ‘
offence
’. Just look at the sheer number of world leaders and associated power-brokers gathering for the opening ceremony on Friday night. And that’s before you count the athletes and sporting officials, often with close ties to power back home…
Anyway, don’t let us distract you from the 45 sports taking centre stage in and around Paris from Friday, including new ones like
breakdancing
(seriously).
Also worth noting:
One Paris event (surfing) will actually take place 15,700km away in Tahiti. The Paris Paralympics will start next month. The next summer games are in LA (2028) and then Brisbane (2032).
Denver became the first city to hand back its hosting rights (1976) after voters passed a referendum against the related spending.
Oh, and we could write a whole briefing on the International Olympic Committee, which is based in Lausanne, generates $8B in revenue each cycle, and is governed by 100 self-selected ‘members’, including the longest-serving of them all, Princess Nora of Liechtenstein.
A MESSAGE FROM HERON
Get Private Credit Deals You Can’t Find Anywhere Else
If you’re earning over $200,000 a year, Heron Finance gives you the tools to turn private credit into income. You’ll enjoy monthly interest payments, automated portfolio management, and easy access to private credit deals. With their all-in-one platform, you’ll make high-yield investing simple and easy.
Try Heron Finance today.
Risk disclosures:
http://heronfinance.com/
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇹🇼
Taiwan
: The Taiwanese armed forces have kicked off their
annual Han Kuang military exercises
, but with a few tweaks aimed at getting as close as possible to actual combat. There’ll be no rehearsals, no scripts, and fewer showy firepower displays, with troops instead concentrating on practising their defensive roles.
🇷🇺
Russia
: Moscow says it has scrambled its fighter jets to
intercept two US bombers
that were approaching its border in the Arctic. The US says it carries out routine flights above international waters, but the Russians have come to see such missions with growing suspicion.
🇲🇾
Malaysia
: The local coast guard has tracked down and
intercepted an oil tanker that fled
after a collision with another ship. Authorities accuse the Sao Tome & Principe-flagged ship, part of the ‘dark fleet’ that transports oil for sanctioned countries, of fleeing the scene in flames and shutting off its tracking system.
🇭🇹
Haiti
: At least
40 people have died at sea
after a boat carrying over 80 migrants heading to Turks and Caicos caught fire. The recent uptick in gang violence across Haiti has pushed more and more people to flee by desperate means.
🇮🇶
Iraq
: After months of negotiations, Iraqi leaders are reportedly hoping a
US-led military force will begin withdrawing
in September and formally end its Iraq mission in 2025. Some US troops could still remain in Iraq in an advisory capacity.
🚨
INTRIGUE EVENT ALERT
Our next event is here! Join us on Wednesday
July 24th (tomorrow)
at
6pm
EDT at the
Embassy of Australia
DC for our event, ‘
How Internet Culture Shapes Our World: Memes, Deep Fakes, and Virality
’.
Explore the impact of AI, viral content, and deep fakes on political discourse, public opinion, and global geopolitics. Gain insights from experts on how these elements shape electoral landscapes and understand the technology and ethical implications behind them.
Registration
is at capacity, but
join the waitlist here
!
EXTRA INTRIGUE
What people around the world googled yesterday
🇨🇦
Canadians
looked up ‘
Williams Lake
’ after the city declared a state of emergency over a
nearby wildfire
.
Folks in
🇳🇬
Nigeria
searched for ‘
Aliko Dangote
’ to read up on Africa’s richest man, who just announced he’d be
willing to sell his refinery business
to Nigeria’s state-owned oil company.
And
🇯🇵
Japanese
golf fans googled ‘
Xander Schauffele
’ after the US athlete (who has family ties to Japan, Taiwan, Germany, and France)
won the British Open
, his second major tournament win this year.
HIDEOUT OF THE DAY
Credits: SDL Auctions
Ever dreamed of living in a nuclear bunker? Us neither. But still, if you’ve got a lazy $26K you could do it anyway.
The above property in northern England goes on
auction
this Friday, and is one of 1,500+ similar bunkers the Brits built during the Cold War. This particular one features no windows, no running water, and no modern conveniences. Oh, but it does have private parking.
Extra fun fact:
Switzerland is the only country that still mandates nuclear bunkers. By law, each citizen has a right to one square metre of underground shelter.
DAILY POLL
What do you think the Olympics are really about?
🤸 Showcasing elite sports
🕊️ A moment of global unity
🥇 A valve for geopolitical competition
💰 Economic benefit
📺 Entertainment
💪 Workout routine inspo
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
What do you think Biden's withdrawal means for the race?
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🤷
Not much - Trump still has a significant advantage (27%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🚀
It's a game-changer - things just got competitive (70%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!) (3%)
Your two cents:
🤷
R.J:
“Dems’ problems run deeper than just Biden, and bumping Harris to the top of the ticket won’t do much to change that.”
🚀
T:
“It gives all those ‘double-no’ voters a new younger option.”
✍️
M.B:
“I am a US citizen and have followed my country's politics my entire adult life. It's done nothing but get more bonkers as time has gone on, and this is no exception. Long ago gave up trying to make predictions or ascribe meaning to unexpected events.”
Was this forwarded to you? We're a team of ex-diplomats producing a concise and engaging geopolitical briefing for 100k+ leaders each day.
It’s free to subscribe
.
✍️ Editor’s corner
Our thanks to those Intriguers who pointed out that, while the Azeri president cited his support for Comoros independence, he was likely referring to nearby Mayotte, which is claimed by Comoros (a sovereign nation) but administered by France.