URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/locked-and-loaded-02ab8218d687b79f
Title: 🌍 Locked and loaded

Today’s briefing:
— Global military spending explodes
— How to skip school in the Philippines
— Meme of the day
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Intrigue co-founder Helen and I have just wrapped some big speaking engagements Down Under and, as this hits your inbox, we’re now hosting Intrigue drinks in Sydney!
In fact, at this very moment, I’m either laughing loudly at one of Helen’s high-quality jokes, or using one of those t-shirt cannons to launch some Intrigue merch into a cheering crowd. I haven’t decided yet.
But while I workshop the details, allow me to sprinkle some freshly grated optimism over your inbox before we get to today’s briefing on (ahem)
our world’s new arms race
.
It was a point that emerged during our panel today: some of modern history’s biggest diplomatic breakthroughs (like the treaties on outer space and arms control) actually emerged out of some of modern history’s most tense moments (the Cold War).
PS
- Our sincere thanks to Blackbird’s
Sunrise
conference for hosting us this week.
Number of the day
0.3%
That’s how much the US economy shrank at an annual pace in Q1, reflecting the biggest non-Covid surge in US imports since 1972, as firms tried to get ahead of Trump’s tariffs.
Locked and loaded
The
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute
(SIPRI) was born back in the 1960s, after Sweden’s then prime minister (who we imagine rocked a turtleneck) suggested establishing a new thinktank to commemorate the country’s 150 years of unbroken peace.
And SIPRI has been absolutely pumping out reports ever since, but it’s really grabbed international attention in recent years, charting how a spooked world is now re-arming.
In fact, the latest
SIPRI report
suggests this trend might even be accelerating.
Here are six of the report’s most intriguing numbers:
37%
That’s how much we’ve ramped up global military spending over the past decade, now hitting a cool $2,718B. And a majority of that has occurred in the past four years, with 2024 recording the
single biggest jump
(~10%) since at least the end of the Cold War.
To be clear — this spending isn’t tracking economic growth. Rather, everyone’s dedicating more of their national pie to re-arming, which gets us to who’s doing all the spending…
60%
That’s how much of the world’s military spending now comes from just five countries: the US, China, Russia, Germany, and India (in that order).
Drill down a little more?
The US alone accounts for 37%, ahead of China (~12%) and Russia (~5.5%).
But those numbers aren’t static…
30
That’s how many consecutive years China’s military spending has now been growing, the longest recorded streak for any country.
Why?
President Xi formalised two goals back at his Communist Party’s 19th National Congress in 2017 — he wanted:
a fully modernised and intelligent military by
2035
, and
one capable of winning wars by
2050
.
But he then quickly accelerated that 2035 modernisation target to 2027, aligning with the People’s Liberation Army’s 100th anniversary. And
does 2027 ring a bell?
It’s also the year when, according to folks like the former heads of INDOPACOM and CIA, Xi wants his military capable of taking Taiwan (btw, both clarified that capability doesn’t mean intent).
And speaking of shifting the goalposts…
18
That’s how many of
NATO’s 32 members
have now reached the alliance’s 2% spending pledge in 2024. Sure, that’s up from 11 a year earlier, but NATO capitals are now grappling with President Trump’s new
5%
target: the early-adopters include Poland, Lithuania, and Estonia, all bordering (and formerly occupied by) Russia.
Fun fact
(heavily contingent on your definition of fun): can you guess which single European country
hasn’t
increased its military spending over the last year? Tiny Malta.
And can you guess which country ramped
up
its spending the most, globally?
$202 million
The answer is
Guyana
! Its $202M defence budget above is a rounding error for any major player, but still up a massive 78% from the year before. And to remember why, just look at
who’s next door
:
Venezuela’s dictator Nicolas Maduro
continues to claim two thirds of Guyana-controlled turf.
And… even we were a little surprised to see which country
dropped
its spending by…
20%
Saudi Arabia
! That 20% drop is over the past decade rather than the past year, but it’s still big, particularly for a top spender like the Saudis. Why?
They’ve wound down their military intervention against the Iran-backed Houthis in neighbouring Yemen, and their oil-infused budget surpluses have dried up, but the kingdom is still the region’s biggest military spender and the world’s seventh largest.
Intrigue’s Take
One way to look at all this is like
a balancing act of balancing acts
: while there’s a shared sense of insecurity driving defence spending up just about everywhere, that’s coming at a time when most governments are already struggling to balance their books.
So there’s this balance between boosting security without either
a)
undermining your own debt sustainability, or
b)
undermining other national strengths and even your own approval ratings when you have to finance this stuff via spending cuts elsewhere.
There’s also this balance between governments wanting
immediate results
through importing arms off the shelf, versus trying to boost your own
longer-term capabilities
at home, which can take many, many years.
And then there’s
the overall pace
at which you move on all of the above: walk too slow, and it might not be enough to reverse years of underinvestment; run too fast, and you might spook the neighbours into making a big miscalculation.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
Foreign Affairs
Read By Decision-Makers. Curated for Changemakers.
Foreign Affairs
delivers insightful, authoritative analysis from global leaders in policy, business, science, and technology. From Washington to Beijing, it's the trusted source for analysis that drives real-world decisions.
Subscribe to
Foreign Affairs
today to get an insider look on today’s most important debates. With six issues per year, daily web articles, more than a century of archives, and an app to customize your experience, there has never been a better way to stay informed.
Subscribe Now
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇺🇦
UKRAINE - US and Ukraine sign minerals deal.
Kyiv and Washington signed a long-awaited natural resources deal on Wednesday, setting up a joint investment fund to share future revenues from Ukraine’s mineral reserves. (
BBC
)
Comment:
While the deal reportedly provides Kyiv with no additional security guarantees, it might remove a source of tension between the two leaders, and could give President Trump  political cover to continue some US support for Ukraine.
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES - Is Tesla looking for a new CEO?
Tesla shares sagged 4% in overnight trading after the Wall Street Journal reported the EV-maker started searching for a new CEO last month as profits and valuations collapsed. The current status of that search is unclear, and Tesla has denied the report. (
WSJ
$)
Comment:
This is a real dilemma for the board — Musk’s political and geopolitical role has now triggered consumer blowback, but his departure would risk market blowback given his role in Tesla’s success since 2008. Fun fact: Tesla Chair Robyn Denholm spoke on a panel at the same conference as Intrigue earlier today (of course, no comment).
🇯🇵
JAPAN - Tokyo slashes growth forecast.
The Bank of Japan just cut its growth forecast by more than half, in a sharp downgrade from the 1.1% growth it was projecting as recently as January. The reason? Tariffs. (
NYT
$)
🇪🇺
BRUSSELS - Beijing lifts EU sanctions.
China has agreed to lift sanctions on five EU parliamentarians, placed in 2021 after the lawmakers accused Beijing of human rights violations against Uyghurs. (
Euractiv
).
Comment:
As the White House’s evolving approach to the world upends chess pieces, capitals everywhere are revisiting their take on friend and foe alike. Beijing will sense an opportunity to further split the West, and these political gestures to mend EU ties are presumably to help serve that end.
🇻🇳
VIETNAM
-
China, Laos, and Cambodia join Vietnam parade.
Vietnam has hosted its 50-year anniversary celebrations marking the end of the Vietnam War, and interestingly, the parade has included 300 soldiers from China, Laos, and Cambodia for the first time. (
France24
)
Comment:
Guess who wasn’t clapping from the VIP section? DC reportedly instructed the US ambassador not to attend, though a lower-ranked US diplomat later turned up at a related reception. That mixed US attendance reflects America’s tricky balancing act between not wanting to a) applaud a strategic rival like China, b) alienate a strategic partner like Vietnam, and c) not wanting to diss the many US veterans who’ve been personally championing US-Vietnam reconciliation over the years. You’d be stunned how much analysis goes into a single RSVP.
🇨🇴
COLOMBIA - Security forces targeted by armed groups.
Bogota is reporting that armed groups have killed more Colombian security personnel over the last couple of weeks, in what Colombia is calling revenge attacks after troops killed several gang leaders amid collapsed peace talks. (
BBC
)
Comment:
There’s been talk of capitals trying to replicate El Salvador’s success in crushing organised crime, but you’ve got to remember Colombia is 50 times bigger, with eight times the population, and confronting a more sophisticated and complicated series of foes all variously blending crime, ideology, and long-standing local grievances.
🇩🇿
ALGERIA
- Draft law could hand military further powers.
Amid ongoing spats with neighbours like Morocco and Mali, Algeria’s council of ministers is pushing a bill that’d expand the military’s powers, including to allow for wartime mobilisation if necessary. (
AP
)
Comment:
This is probably intended as both a regional flex (don’t mess with us) and a domestic tool (harnessing a bit of nationalism) to deflect from its economic woes and political dissent.
Extra Intrigue
In other worlds…
Climate adaptation:
Schools in the Philippines
are now altering their class timetables and installing water fountains in classrooms to avoid having to shut down for entire days amid record temperatures.
Art:
A museum in the Netherlands is researching how to restore a $57M Mark Rothko painting after a
young child “
made scratches
”
on the artwork’s surface.
Defense:
The European Defence Agency has chosen André Denk, a German general (rather than the traditional diplomat or politician), to
lead the department
, which drives defence cooperation among EU member states.
Meme of the day
Who doesn’t love getting an ooooh or maybe even one of those sweet sweet aaaaahs when telling others what you do for a crust, right?
Family Guy
even wrote a great joke about it, with an insecure Peter hoping to impress his old school friends by turning up to a reunion as a ‘
cowboy astronaut millionaire
’ (then
embodied
by Jeff Bezos).
And while of course it’s always an honour to serve your country and your community, it does come with plenty of pain to balance out the perks: it’s high stress, low pay, tough on families, and tough on livers.
So this is a shout-out to the many diplomats reading us each day, all around the world. If today’s briefing on military spending is a reminder of anything, it’s that your work, often unseen, matters now as much as ever.
Today’s poll
Do you think we're in the midst of an arms race?
🚀 Yep, whether declared or not
🕊️ Nope, it'll hit fiscal constraints
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think the US's global standing is stronger than it was 101 days ago?
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 👍 Yes, you've got to break a few eggs to make an omelette (16%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
👎 No, it’s undermined it  (83%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!)  (1%)
Your two cents:
👎
E.K.H
: “Every country should be looking at ways to cut trade ties with the US… Even the ones lining up to negotiate trade deals should only expect to minimize short-term impact while they diversify away long-term.”
👍
M.P
: “The knee jerk response is No, but who was sucking up to us before?”
👎
D.H
: “Transactional diplomacy means no friends and no friends is a lonely place.”
✍️ M.T
: “I think the US is ahead of the game in terms of a necessary review and rebalancing, which was going to be messy no matter who did it.”