URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/lulas-south-american-summit
Title: 🌍 Lula's South American Summit

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
The 1st of June is a busy day: folks around the world celebrate international parents day, dinosaur day, olive day, and ‘go barefoot’ day. So we’ll be marking the day by eating olives barefoot with our parents while watching Jurassic Park.
Today’s briefing is a 4.1 min read:
🇧🇷
Lula’s
South American
summit turns sour over Venezuela.
🚗
China plays host to
Elon Musk
and other top CEOs.
➕
Plus:
Why WWII shipwrecks are so valuable, how the papers are covering a sky-high encounter between China and the US, and a gold rush in space.
🗺️ AROUND THE WORLD
🇰🇵
North Korea:
Pyongyang’s first-ever spy satellite
failed and fell into the sea
off the Korean peninsula yesterday (Wednesday). The satellite’s launch triggered missile alert systems across Japan and South Korea, forcing residents to take shelter.
🇱🇻
Latvia
: Diplomats rejoice! Parliamentarians have elected
long-time foreign minister
Edgars Rinkevics as the country’s next president, by a single-vote margin. Serving in the largely ceremonial role, he’ll represent Latvia (an EU and NATO member) at NATO's Vilnius summit next month.
🇵🇼
Palau
: The Pacific Island nation of Palau has raised concerns after a Chinese vessel reportedly loitered over and examined one of Palau’s
undersea internet cables
. Palau is one of only four Pacific Island nations that continue to recognise Taiwan.
🇵🇪
Peru
: Health officials have forbidden households from
filling vases with water
in order to combat a major outbreak of dengue. Scientists say climate change is at least partially responsible for the outbreak, which has been exacerbated by high rainfall and temperatures.
🇨🇫
Central African Republic (CAR)
: President Faustin-Archange Touadera has set a referendum on
eliminating presidential term limits
for 30 July. If successful, the change would allow him to serve indefinitely, a top priority for the ~2,000 Wagner mercenaries in CAR.
🇧🇷
BRAZIL | GEOPOLITICS
Lula grasps at South American unity
Briefly:
Brazilian President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva is back on the world stage, and he’s
hosted a summit
to prove it. On Tuesday the leaders of 12 South American countries met in Brasilia to try and resuscitate the Union of South American Nations (UNASUR), a bloc which last met nine years ago.
The leaders reportedly discussed the possibility of a currency union, a regional energy market, and deeper security integration.
But unity proved elusive on at least one point: Venezuela.
👐
On the one hand you have leaders like Lula, who welcomed Venezuela’s president to the summit and said the idea of an anti-democratic Venezuela was a “
narrative
” promoted by the West.
🙅
But others like the leader of Chile pushed back, highlighting the serious human rights issues in Venezuela and encouraging fellow leaders not to
“bury our head in the sand”
.
Intrigue’s take:
There’s been a real alphabet soup of Latin American regional blocs over the years: CELAC, ALBA, CASA, SICA, AP, PIM, MERCOSUR, UNASUR… the list goes on, and it’s tempting to respond with yet another acronym: WTF.
Many of these blocs have struggled to gain traction.
They fade away, another is born, or an old one (like UNASUR) is revived. And the problem’s not generally the bloc, or its mandate, or even its leadership. It’s more the ideological divisions that run through the region, both within and between countries.
But when Latin America does find a durable path forward, there’s a good chance it can leave an admiring world uttering a new acronym: OMG.
Also worth noting:
In 2018, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Paraguay and Peru suspended their participation in UNASUR. The President of Colombia announced his country would be
rejoining this week
.
Around half a million displaced Venezuelans now live in Chile. Those in Chile for five years or more can vote, even if they’re not citizens.
📰
GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES
How different newspapers covered
: A sky-high incident between China and the US.
Links
:
SCMP
,
CNN
,
The Guardian
.
Today’s briefing is sponsored by
Morning Brew
Get smarter in 5 minutes with Morning Brew (it’s free)
There’s a reason over 4 million people start their day with Morning Brew - the daily email that delivers the latest news from Wall Street to Silicon Valley. Business news doesn’t have to be boring…make your mornings more enjoyable, for free.
Check it out!
🚗
CHINA | GEO-ECONOMICS
How Elon Musk got to Beijing, probably.
Musk visits China for first time in three years
Briefly:
Tesla (et al) founder Elon Musk met with China’s Foreign Minister Qin Gang on Tuesday (30 May). Musk and several other top CEOs are visiting Beijing for a JP Morgan conference.
China is key for Musk.
Its 1.4 billion person market makes up a fifth of Tesla’s revenue, a third of its unit sales, and more than
half
its total production. So it’s no surprise Musk is (
according to Beijing
) wary of US-China decoupling.
China’s
statement
about Musk also included some banging automotive puns, including the need to avoid
“dangerous driving”
in US-China relations, and
“step on the gas”
to promote cooperation. Have folks there been reading Intrigue?
Intrigue’s take:
China’s defence minister
won’t meet
the US defence secretary, and the foreign minister is
slow-walking a meeting
with his US counterpart.
Yet China’s top officials clear their calendar for Musk. And by doing so, they send a message to the US: be more like Musk, keep investing, say nice things, and everybody will get along.
Things might get trickier for Musk when China chooses to send a different message.
Also worth noting:
Tesla’s share price
jumped 5%
after Musk met China’s foreign minister.
Tesla announced
plans last month to build a new battery factory in Shanghai.
Musk
didn’t tweet
while he was in China. It was his longest break from Twitter in a year. The app is banned in China but is generally available for those with a US roaming plan.
👀
EXTRA INTRIGUE
What we’re reading about the
new space race
.
India rockets into the global space race
($)
A gold rush in space
The billionaire space race is on
The Korean space race is heating up
📸
PHOTO OF THE DAY
Credits: Malaysia Maritime Enforcement Agency/AP
Malaysian authorities have
seized a China-flagged ship
suspected of looting cannon shells and metal from two British warship wrecks in the South China Sea.
In addition to relics, looters covet pre-1945 steel: a metal that hasn’t been contaminated by nuclear fallout, making it highly valuable in medical and scientific equipment.
🗳️ POLL TIME!
Do you think Elon Musk's meeting with China's foreign minister was a good idea?
👍 Yes, business interests can be a force for good in China-US relations
👎 No, Beijing was using him to wedge the US
🖋️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
What do you think is
the
defining feature of a world superpower?
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️ 🎖️ Military supremacy  (28%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
💰 Economic supremacy (43%)
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 💻 Technological supremacy  (16%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🤝
Diplomatic clout (9%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!) (4%)
Your two cents:
💻
A.G.T:
“While economic and military supremacy are the practical projections of superpower status, technological supremacy is the basis for both economic and military supremacy.”
✍️
R.L:
“Cultural influence. The U.S.'s most powerful export is Hollywood.”