URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/lula-goes-central-bank
Title: 🌍 Lula goes up against the central bank

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
It’s
Africa Day
! Folks across the continent and around the world will today mark the 60th anniversary of the founding of the Organization of African Unity, the predecessor to the African Union. This year’s theme is “Our Africa Our Future”.
Today’s briefing is a 4.1 min read:
🇧🇷
A public feud between
Brazil
’s central bank and president.
🇰🇪
Was
Kenya
’s government hacked?
➕
Plus:
The AC development index, how the papers are covering Hungary blocking EU aid to Ukraine, and can AI spot the next Facebook or Uber?
🗺️ AROUND THE WORLD
🇳🇵
Nepal
: The latest climbing season on Everest is set to become one of the
deadliest-ever
, with 11 climbers losing their lives in just the past few weeks. Critics say Nepal is
over-issuing permits
, which have raised $5M in revenue so far this year.
🇫🇮
Finland
: A record 6,000 Russians
emigrated to Finland
in 2022, according to Finland’s statistics agency. Around 5,500 Russians migrated to Finland in 1991, the year the Soviet Union collapsed.
🇮🇩
Indonesia
: A former president has slammed the
military’s plans
to establish commands in all 38 of Indonesia’s provinces, asking
“are we going to war?”
The reform was announced by Defence Minister Prabowo Subianto, who has accepted his party’s nomination to run for president next year.
🇵🇦
Panama
: The $43M
money laundering trial
of former president Ricardo Martinelli began in Panama City on Tuesday. Martinelli still plans to participate in his party’s primary election in July.
🇩🇿
Algeria
: A prominent pro-democracy opposition figure, Karim Tabbou, was
arrested in his home
on Tuesday. Tabbou previously served a one-year sentence in 2020 for criticising the army’s role in Algerian politics on social media.
🇧🇷
BRAZIL | ECONOMICS
Central bank Governor Roberto Campos Neto
Brazil’s president in public feud with central bank
Briefly:
Brazil’s central bank (BCB) continues to keep interest rates high despite a new
economic survey
forecasting cooler inflation in the country. In response, Brazil’s President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva has criticised the BCB chief for months.
The BCB has pursued an aggressive monetary policy
in recent years, hiking rates earlier and harder than other central banks around the world. This has helped tame inflation, but it’s put parts of the Brazilian economy under strain:
📈
Bankruptcies have spiked 34.1% this year
💸
Household debt hit
record highs
last year, and
🐢
GDP growth is forecast at around
half the world average
So since taking office this year,
President Lula has
said
the BCB chief:
“has no commitment to Brazil”
is holding back Brazil’s economic growth, and
is loyal to the previous right-leaning president that appointed him.
For his part, the BCB chief says everyone wants lower rates, but spiralling prices would be much worse, particularly in a country with a history of hyperinflation.
Intrigue’s take:
Central bank independence is a key feature of modern democracies, allowing technocrats the freedom to make unpopular but necessary economic decisions.
Brazil’s strong institutions offer good reasons to be bullish on its future. But the country only formalised its central bank’s autonomy in
2021
, and markets are getting nervous Lula might try to pack its board with loyalists.
Just ask Turkey where that road can lead.
Also worth noting:
Markets in Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Mexico are
expecting
rates to start falling before the end of this year.
The central bank’s chief and all its board members will complete their terms during Lula’s presidency. Lula will then appoint their replacements.
Brazil’s central bank hiked rates several times last year, before Lula’s election victory.
📰
GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES
How different newspapers covered
: Hungary blocking EU aid to Ukraine.
Links
:
Politico
,
Hungary Today
,
Al Jazeera
.
Today’s briefing is sponsored by
Arcadia
Connect to clean energy in two minutes.
Whether you rent or own your home, Arcadia can help you power it with 100% clean energy for just $5/month - no installations, long-term commitments, or changes to your current electricity provider.
Just enter your zip code and utility company, and Arcadia will check if there’s a community solar farm near you. Connect to it without extra cost and receive guaranteed monthly savings on your power bill.
Get started.
🇰🇪
KENYA | DEFENCE & SECURITY
Kenya is a big piece of China’s debt puzzle
China wants its money back
Briefly:
Hackers based in China targeted the Kenyan government in a years-long attempt to access data about the country’s debt, according to a
Reuters report
. China has denied involvement.
For the last couple of decades
, Kenya has borrowed from China and others to fund major infrastructure projects like highways and railroads. But those projects haven’t boosted revenue enough to cover loan repayments.
Intrigue’s take:
Several African governments struggling to meet repayments might be forced to cut back on essential investments to keep servicing their debt.
For its part
, Kenya has taken extraordinary measures to pay back its debts, even temporarily suspending salaries for ministers, legislators, and civil servants.
And China seems to be taking extraordinary measures to
enforce
those debts. The reported hacking of Kenya’s government suggests real anxiety in Beijing that much of the $80B in outstanding debt across the continent may not be repaid.
Also worth noting:
Governments across Africa now spend around
17% of their revenues
to service debt, with China the single largest bilateral lender.
Last month, Kenya’s top economic advisor
tweeted
, “
Salaries or default? Take your pick
”.
The IMF
announced
this week it’s agreed a $1B loan to Kenya. The IMF and China
agreed
to restructure Ghana’s debt earlier this month.
👀
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Here’s what we’re reading about
venture capital and start-ups
.
Can A.I. spot the next Facebook or Uber?
($)
We read
Tech Safari
to get the latest on all things happening in African tech and venture capital
How Silicon Valley's troubles are reshaping venture capital
($)
Start-ups are taking over the defence industry
📊
CHART OF THE DAY
Credits: Bloomberg.
According to
one estimate
, a billion AC units will be installed before the end of the decade, with most growth coming from China and India. The hotter the earth gets, the more AC we’ll need, but air conditioners aren’t too good for the planet.
🗳️ POLL TIME!
Should central banks always be independent from the government?
💼 Yes, independence is sacrosanct
🔎 No, certain situations require government involvement
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you agree with France's decision to ban air routes that can be covered by a train journey of less than 2.5 hours?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🧑‍✈️ Yes, and high time too! (68%)
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 🛩️ No, it's a symbolic (and annoying) move!  (30%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 🖋️ Other (write in!)  (2%)
Your two cents:
🧑‍✈️
D.D:
“Absolutely. With the increasing temperatures these measures are vital to “keeping 1.5°c alive””
🖋️
A.A:
“This seems like another policy that's good in theory, but will fall apart in practice. With all the strikes that have happened lately in France, will there be enough trains still running to meet new demand?”