URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/macron-promises-reset-africa-relations
Title: 🌍 Macron promises a reset in Africa relations

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Tuesdays really deserve more credit. Allied forces stormed Nazi beaches on a Tuesday.
Harry Potter
was released on a Tuesday. Heck, we even discovered Uranus on a Tuesday. So get out there and take that beach, publish that novel, and discover that amusingly named planet. It's Tuesday!
Today’s briefing is a 4.4 min read:
🌍 French President Macron asks
Africa
for a reset.
🌊 The UN reaches historic
high seas
protection agreement.
➕ Plus:
Sticky Euro Area inflation, how the papers are covering Greek protests following a deadly train crash, and an economic miracle in jeopardy.
🚀 PS:
Our all-time record
(last month) wa
s 1,411 new subscribers in a day. If you feel we're worth sharing with just one friend today, we could smash that record
🙏
- Valentina, Ethan & Jeremy
Share the Intrigue!
🗺️ AROUND THE WORLD
🇬🇪
Georgia
: MPs brawled during a debate on Monday over a bill requiring foreign-funded NGOs and media outlets to
register as “foreign influence agents
." Opponents say the law is designed to derail Georgia’s EU bid, which 80% of Georgians support.
🇪🇪
Estonia
: The pro-EU and pro-NATO Reform Party of Estonia’s prime minister, Kaja Kallas, won a
landslide victory in parliamentary elections
on Sunday. Kallas has been among Ukraine’s most vocal supporters since the war began last year.
🇵🇰
Pakistan
: Police in Lahore attempted to
arrest former Prime Minister Imran Khan
on charges that he accepted and attempted to resell gifts from foreign dignitaries while in office. Khan has evaded arrest and says his life may be threatened if he enters custody.
🇪🇨
Ecuador
: A judge in Ecuador has
approved corruption charges
against Lenin Moreno. Prosecutors say Moreno, who served as president from 2017-2021, accepted millions in bribes from a Chinese dam-building company while vice president from 2013-2017.
🇿🇦
South Africa
: President Cyril Ramaphosa delivered his promised
cabinet reshuffle
late on Monday. In addition to replacing his deputy president, Ramaphosa appointed an inaugural minister of electricity to address the country’s unprecedented blackouts.
🇫🇷 FRANCE | DIPLOMACY
Macron faces an uphill climb in Africa
Briefly:
French President Emmanuel Macron wrapped up a four day trip to Africa on Sunday, after visits to Gabon, Angola, Congo, and the Democratic Republic of Congo. It was his 18th visit to the continent, and culminated in a promise by Macron to reset relations with France’s former colonies there.
Last year alone, Burkina Faso and Mali expelled French forces
, and France withdrew its troops from the Central African Republic. So Macron's offer to reset relations is a little like offering to go to jail after the judge has already banged her gavel: i.e., merci for the offer Monsieur President, but it's happening anyway.
Still, Macron says he'll end the age of French intervention known as
Franceafrique
and work with the continent on Africa's terms. For now, this means further reducing troop numbers and co-managing French bases in Africa with host governments.
Intrigue’s take:
Geopolitics abhors a vacuum, and recent US, Russian and Chinese high-level visits to Africa have sought to fill the vacuum left there by France last year.
But while Macron says he has
“no nostalgia about France-in-Africa”
(he's the first French president born after the country's colonial era
),
his trip suggests he has no intention of ceding French influence any further.
As Macron himself
said: “
Africa is a theatre of competition... We have our role to play, no more, no less.
”
Also worth noting:
Macron attended the One Forest Summit during his time in Gabon and
pledged $53M
to conservation initiatives.
In a sign of
Russia’s growing influence
, some protestors in the Democratic Republic of the Congo called on Macron to offer "help to Mr Putin."
📰 GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES
How different newspapers covered:
Anti-government protests in Greece after a deadly train crash.
Links:
Kathimerini
,
BBC
,
DW
.
Sponsored by
Power Corridor
The Intersection of Wall Street and DC, where money collides with power
— it’s where elections are decided, corporate dynasties are born (or die), and the decisions that shape the future of our country are made.
Meet
Power Corridor, a new newsletter brought to you by The Daily Upside
. Written by Leah McGrath Goodman, an investigative journalist with a long track record of disruptive journalism, Power Corridor is your key to understanding the people and forces shaping our world. Join Leah for no holds barred coverage of the stories that matter.
Subscribe for free.
🌊 UN | ENVIRONMENT
Turtle-y worth celebrating
Countries agree to sign historic ocean protection treaty
Briefly:
After nearly two decades of on-and-off negotiations, UN member states finally agreed to protect
the high seas
. The UN High Seas Treaty agreed in New York on Saturday sets out the legal framework to establish marine protected areas in international waters (also known as high seas).
Two thirds of the world's oceans are high seas, and only 1% of those are protected. Without protection, it's been an environmental ship-show out there.
Intrigue’s take:
This weekend’s historic treaty is a massive step towards achieving the UN’s 30x30 commitment, which promises to designate 30% of land and sea as protected areas by 2030. The agreement is also much-needed proof that the UN can still get things done (albeit 20 years late).
Oh yeah, and
Jane Fonda was there
to help nudge exhausted diplomats over the line.
Also worth noting:
All eyes are now on whether this year’s
Dubai COP28
climate conference (30 November -12 December) can keep the momentum going.
Overfishing has reduced the population of large ocean fish to
10% of their pre-industrial numbers
.
📊 CHART OF THE DAY
Data: Eurostat.
Stickier than expected...
Inflation in the Euro Area
(aka 'Eurozone': the 20 countries that use the Euro) decreased to 8.5% in February, but the figure was still above expectations. Lingering inflation will put pressure on the European Central Bank to keep
raising interest rates
and cool the economy down.
👀 EXTRA INTRIGUE
We’re very online, so you don’t have to be.
How Russian journalists in exile are covering the War in Ukraine
How ASEAN survives - and thrives - amid great-power competition
How Venezuela’s Nicolás Maduro outfoxed the west
Bangladesh’s economic miracle is in jeopardy
What caused ‘Havana Syndrome’?
🗳️ POLL TIME!
What do you think is the most important policy we need to protect our oceans?
🎣 Stricter fishing regulation
🛳️ Expedite clean fuel ships
🧴 Ban single use plastic
🛢️ Restrict underwater mining
🖊️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday's poll:
Has the G20 become too politicised for an economic forum?
🟨🟨🟨⬜️⬜️⬜️ 🤔 Yes, focusing on politics takes away from economic talk  (32%)
🟩🟩🟩🟩🟩🟩 🙅 No, economics *is* politics  (68%)
Your two cents:
🙅
M:
"Particularly at the international level, both are indissociable."
🤔
J.D:
"Politics may *impact* economics, but they are not the same. While rare, it is possible to have an economic policy that meets approval of multiple political viewpoints."