URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/macron-tests-new-china-strategy
Title: 🌍 Macron tests out a new China strategy

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
We’re back! Whether you were celebrating Easter, Passover, Ramadan, or just the incandescent ecstasy of being alive, we hope you had a terrific weekend.
Today’s briefing is a 4.7 min read:
🇫🇷
China flatters
France
’s Macron
with royal treatment.
🇺🇸
A
US
intelligence leak rattles friend and foe alike.
➕
Plus:
China divides and conquers, how the papers are covering Ukraine’s diplomacy in India, and Tesla’s new business strategy.
🎧 The latest Intrigue Outloud:
Go deeper on Australia and the world around it, with former Australian ambassador and member of parliament Dave Sharma.
Listen here!
🗺️ AROUND THE WORLD
🇬🇪
Georgia
: Thousands gathered in the capital Tbilisi on Sunday to
protest the ruling
Georgian Dream
party. Georgians overwhelmingly support EU membership, and accuse
Georgian Dream
of undermining the country’s EU bid in order to assuage Russia.
🇬🇧
United Kingdom
: US President Joe
Biden landed in Belfast
today (Tuesday) to mark the 25th anniversary of the Good Friday Agreement, which largely ended decades of sectarian violence in Northern Ireland. Tensions do remain, and the UK recently raised the terrorist threat level in Northern Ireland to "severe".
🇲🇲
Myanmar
: The ruling junta in Myanmar sentenced a Christian pastor to
six years in prison
last week on charges of terrorism and unlawful association. Human rights groups say his jailing is politically motivated.
🇬🇾
Guyana
: The International Court of Justice will
rule on a border dispute
between Venezuela and Guyana, despite Venezuelan objections. Guyana has controlled the oil-rich region in question since 1899.
🇸🇩
Sudan
: The return to civilian rule in Sudan has been
delayed yet again
after a dispute between the ruling junta and a paramilitary group. Sudan’s ruling junta had promised to start the transition today (11 April).
🇫🇷
FRANCE | GEOPOLITICS
Macron and Xi spent around seven hours together in China last week.
Macron tests out a new approach to China
Briefly:
French President Emmanuel Macron and European Commission President Ursula von der Leyen visited China last week (5-7 April). The trip was intended to recalibrate relations with China and encourage it to take a more active role in ending the Russo-Ukraine War.
While the idea was to show a united European front, the result was anything but. Chinese President Xi Jinping rolled out the red carpet for Macron, greeting him with military parades, lavish state dinners and hours of conversation.
As for von der Leyen,
who had just delivered
an assertive speech
on China, Beijing rolled out very little beyond a
social media campaign
portraying her as an American puppet.
So who got what?
President Xi didn’t really budge on French or EU concerns (such as China’s own permissive approach to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine)
But Macron
did
budge on China’s concerns, promptly
calling
for a Europe less beholden to the US, and less
“caught up”
in Taiwan tensions
So one former French PM essentially summed it up as a win for Xi:
“flattery works”
.
Intrigue’s take:
This trip was Macron’s latest attempt at a conciliatory approach to relations with the West’s rivals, distinguishing France from Washington’s more confrontational stance. And there’s nothing wrong with this in theory.
But in
practice
, Macron’s approach has already failed once: he had Putin on speed-dial before the Russo-Ukraine War, yet Putin invaded anyway. And now this same approach with China seems only to have emboldened Beijing, while alienating France’s oldest ally and Europe’s main security guarantor (the US).
So sure, give the softer approach a try. But it’ll always beg the question: who’s playing who?
Also worth noting:
Unlike Macron’s visit, von der Leyen’s parallel trip was not a formal state visit. This partly explains the
difference in welcome
.
Hours after Macron’s departure, China
began three-day military drills
to simulate an invasion and encirclement of Taiwan.
📰
GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES
How different newspapers covered
: The visit by Ukraine’s deputy foreign minister, Emine Dzhaparova, to India.
Links
:
Kyiv Post
,
Anadolu Agency
,
Hindustan Times
Today’s briefing is sponsored by
Meco
The best new app for newsletter reading.
Meco is a distraction free-space for reading and discovering newsletters. Add your favourite newsletters and liberate your inbox in seconds.
Try Meco today!
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES | INTELLIGENCE
The Pentagon is leaking
US intel leak rattles friend and foe alike
Briefly:
US officials are rushing to contain damage caused by the online appearance of a tranche of highly classified documents.
The files - which cover the Russo-Ukraine war plus events in Korea, Israel and beyond - first appeared weeks ago via Discord, an online messaging platform popular with gamers. But the leak within an obscure corner of the internet drew little attention until The New York Times
reported the story
on Friday.
There are several theories on who leaked the material and why
, including:
An aggrieved US official seeking to damage US interests
A mole or hack within the US system
A US disinformation campaign (a theory favoured by Russian bloggers)
A US official showing off among fellow gamers, or
A member of the public finding and uploading lost classified material
The latter two theories might seem odd, but they’re entirely plausible. Western officials have recently leaked sensitive info
via gaming platforms
just to win an argument or two. And they’ve occasionally left classified material
on a train
,
in a briefcase
or even in a filing cabinet for sale at
a thrift shop
.
Intrigue’s take:
This latest leak is significant in several ways. First, it reveals the existence of an advanced US satellite system known as
‘LAPIS’
. When a new intel capability like this is revealed, adversaries have a better shot at thwarting it.
Second, the leak confirms publicly what’s long been known privately: that the US keeps a close eye on its allies. This risks undermining local support for US alliances around the world. And third, the leak will cause a clamming up of Western intelligence, as US agencies and allies limit what they’re willing to share.
So, regardless of who’s behind the leak, it seems to achieve the aims of US adversaries: sowing doubt, discord and suspicion across the US and its allies.
Also worth noting:
The leaked intel discloses Russian attempts to secure munitions from US allies like
Turkey
and
Egypt
, and catalogues
Ukraine’s vulnerabilities
.
This leak seems to involve dozens or hundreds of classified files. A decade ago, Edward Snowden’s
mass leak
involved him downloading
1.7 million
files.
The US isn’t the only one angry with Discord.
Nintendo
is now taking legal action against it after details of the next
Zelda
game were leaked.
👀
EXTRA INTRIGUE
We’re very online, so you don’t have to be.
The costs of El Salvador’s crime crackdown, a year on
($)
Chinese banks are ditching bad loans
($)
Why Poland has stopped importing Ukrainian grain
Land grabbing in Mongolia’s mining-driven economy
Tesla’s new(ish) strategy? Cut prices.
💬
QUOTE OF THE DAY
We were delighted to have former Australian ambassador and member of parliament Dave Sharma join our latest
Intrigue Outloud
to chat about Australia’s relations with China, the Pacific, and beyond. Check it out on
Apple
,
Spotify
, or
wherever
you get your podcasts.
Plus be sure to subscribe to Dave’s
weekly bulletin
on what’s driving global developments.
🗳️ POLL TIME!
What do you think of Macron's China strategy?
⚖️ It's good, Europe needs to chart its own course
👎 It's terrible, and plays right into China's hands
🤐 It doesn't matter, France doesn't have that much sway
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Thursday’s poll: What do you think about AMLO's letter to President Xi?
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️
💯
It's a classic AMLO political stunt (26%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🆘
It's a genuine plea for China's cooperation on fentanyl (5%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
👋
It's a slap directed at the US (9%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
☯️
It's a bit of everything (59%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️
Other (write in!) (1%)
Your two cents:
✍️ J.N:
“The US is increasingly considering Mexico as an industrial plant alternative to China. AMLO is sending a message to the US – dial back the rhetoric or risk pushing Mexico into the arms of its rival.”
☯️ C.M:
“AMLO really has done a great job antagonizing two superior world powers...good luck with that!”