URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/madagascar-s-coup-and-you
Title: 🌍 Madagascar’s coup and you

Today’s briefing:
— Madagascar’s coup and you
— Go work for the Brits in Chile
— Meme of the day
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. One thing that I, as a self-professed Gen Z-obsessed-Millennial, should have foreseen this year is the sweeping impact that Gen Z would have on global geopolitics.
From the Middle East to South Asia, Gen Z have shifted their political engagement to political activism, and have taken to the streets to challenge what they see as unjust and mid. The latest country to feel this Gen Z effect is
Madagascar
, which seems to have
just had another coup
. It’s our top story for today.
Number of the day
14
That’s how many nations just won a three-year term on the UN’s
Human Rights Council
, comprising 47 members who meet to discuss current issues and make non-binding resolutions. The new members include Angola, Chile, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, India, Iraq, Italy, Mauritius, Pakistan, Slovenia, South Africa, the UK, and Vietnam.
Coup-ed up
It seems Colonel Michael Randrianirina is now in charge.
We knew we were overdue for another coup, but our money was on some place like Thailand, where military takeovers drop more often than seasons of
Dancing with the Stars
.
And yet here we are, briefing you on a coup in East Africa’s beautiful island nation of Madagascar.
So here’s what you need to know.
Intriguers won’t be
entirely
surprised, as we’ve been tracking the
Gen Z-led demonstrations
since late September (and even did a whole
Gen Z briefing
). As can often happen, initial anger at corruption and water/power cuts quickly morphed into a broader anti-government movement calling for President Rajoelina’s resignation.
Then last week we flagged he appointed a general as his prime minister, claiming it was to restore order, but it whiffed to us more of
desperation
to keep the military on side.
And sure enough, soldiers from Madagascar’s elite and influential
CAPSAT
unit then joined the demonstrators over the weekend. Two quick
fun facts
about CAPSAT:
It’s a French
acronym
for the extremely non-elite and non-influential-sounding
Personnel Administration and Technical and Administrative Services Corps
, and
Lest you laugh at them, they’re
the same military unit
that first installed Rajoelina after the last coup in 2009 (he later won presidential elections in 2018).
Anyways, this CAPSAT cameo is when the excrement really hit the ventilator:
Rajoelina accused his opponents of trying to assassinate him and stage a coup
So he disappeared, with claims a French military aircraft whisked him to safety
Meanwhile, the opposition moved to impeach Rajoelina for bailing, so…
Rajoelina
tried
dissolving parliament from hiding, but it was too late (even his own party backed the impeachment motion).
And that’s how we got to today:
CAPSAT’s chief (the colonel above) is now in charge and suspending key institutions, promising to hold elections within two years. Ol’ Rajoelina? He’s gone quiet.
And the rest of the world is staying notably silent too, likely because this brand of ‘
constitutional
coup
’ blurs the lines of legitimacy:
Technically, the old guy got booted via impeachment
Technically, the new guy got a supreme court invite to take over, and
Technically, the democratic flame still flickers because the lower house continues.
Plus with major powers now competing for influence across Africa, most capitals are realistically waiting to see who emerges on top before backing anyone. If (say) the US were to condemn this as a coup, the new rulers would run to (say) China or Russia.
But here are three quick global ripples in the meantime:
🇫🇷
Paris
The former
colonial power
naturally has sway, but it also has baggage: many locals didn’t like that Rajoelina apparently held secret French citizenship (getting whisked off the island via a French military aircraft won’t have helped).
​​
🇮🇳
Delhi
India wants to be
top dog in the Indian Ocean
and sees Madagascar as critical, with the Indian navy
identifying
the Mozambique Channel as a “
primary area of maritime interest
” a decade ago, and running a military listening post there since 2007. Delhi will be hedging its bets to ensure it’s tight with whoever holds the power.
📉
Markets
With
~30% of global tanker traffic
passing through the Mozambique Channel, supply chain executives will be bracing for any spill-over into maritime operations.
But diving deeper into specific sectors, just recall that Madagascar single-handedly supplies the world with 80% of its
vanilla
, ~5% of its
nickel
(critical for the energy transition), and ~3% of its
cobalt
(EV batteries and electronics). And while single-digits might sound small, in today’s rattled world, that’s still enough to spike prices.
Intrigue’s Take
Madagascar’s political instability stems not from some ethno-religious or even ideological divide, but rather
a
) elite rivalry for power and resources, fuelling
b
) massive inequality, in turn both jointly undermining
c
) efforts to build credible institutions.
You can see that in
the story of (ex?) President Rajoelina
himself, who was a media mogul before bursting onto the political scene as the young mayor of his nation’s capital, then quickly leading protests that toppled Madagascar’s government in 2009. A couple of decades later, he ended up the very thing he said he was against (an out-of-touch elite).
And of course, constantly hovering in Madagascar’s shadows is that classic,
self-fulfilling prophecy
of geopolitics: an influential, politically-involved military. Try curbing that influence, and guess what CAPSAT might do next.
Sound even smarter:
Russia renewed its 2018 military pact with Madagascar in 2022, and will inevitably be on the next flight to Antananarivo in a race for influence, though we doubt they can really offer African partners much while burning resources in Ukraine.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
The
Institute for Global Negotiation
New IGN Course: Applying Neuroscience in Professional Negotiation
The Institute for Global Negotiation (IGN) offers a focused online training exploring the role of brain processes in high-stakes negotiations. In two sessions, participants will examine how cognitive patterns and neurochemical responses affect negotiation behaviour, judgment, and outcomes.
Led by IGN Senior Fellow and Neuroscientist Dr Randall Waechter, the course combines scientific insight with applied tools to help experienced negotiators practice and refine their approach to successful negotiations. The course has limited availability.
See details & register.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇮🇱
ISRAEL
-
Ceasefire wobble?
Hamas has returned another four of the 28 deceased hostages it promised, after Israel announced it would curb aid until they’re all home. Hamas, which is accusing Israel of breaching the ceasefire via shootings and drone strikes, has previously flagged it might not be able to locate all hostage bodies (20 are still missing). (
The Guardian
)
Comment:
Separately, Israel just lost its FIFA World Cup men’s qualifier against Italy, meaning soccer’s governing body (and its 2026 hosts in Canada, Mexico, and the US) avoid the boycott debate this time around.
🇳🇱
NETHERLANDS
-
Dutch courage.
It turns out The Hague’s seizure of local China-owned chipmaker Nexperia came after DC warned it’d extend US export controls to the Dutch subsidiary unless they ousted the firm’s Chinese CEO. (
FT
$)
Comment:
And… why would the US want this particular CEO gone? The most credible speculation we’ve seen is he was trying to pull a classic asset strip, shifting anything of value to a new shell company in hopes of evading US controls and routing chip production to China, instead of (say) Europe’s automakers. There are reports Dutch employees gave authorities a heads-up.
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
You shall not pass.
China’s major airlines are urging the Trump administration to drop its planned ban on flying to the US over Russia, warning it’d increase travel times and costs. (
CNA
)
Comment:
You might wonder why this ban is only happening now, more than three years into Putin’s war. It’s partly an attempt to level the playing field, as Putin’s early ban on Western airline overflight gave a massive advantage to China’s carriers. It also comes as US-China trade ties hit more turbulence, with both sides looking for leverage.
🇪🇺
EU
-
Back on track?
The IMF has raised its 2025 eurozone growth forecast to 1.2%, citing Germany’s massive spending boost and resilient demand in Spain. But the DC-based body is warning that uncertainty still threatens Europe's economic outlook. (
Euractiv
)
🇦🇺
AUSTRALIA
-
Pay the piper.
Australia will soon cough up its second of three $1B payments to support US submarine production via the AUKUS pact, that’ll involve (among other things) the first-ever foreign purchase of three US nuclear-powered Virginia subs. (
Reuters
)
Comment
: Earlier Aussie fears around the Trump 2.0 future of the AUKUS pact seem to have subsided, though the Pentagon’s review is still underway. Prime Minister Albanese is due to meet Trump in DC next week — the PM faced domestic criticism for taking so long to meet his US counterpart, though this was probably a calculated move to avoid getting caught in Trump’s crossfire
.
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
On the dotted line.
Adding to the slew of recent freedom-of-speech headlines, rival outlets from NYT and CNN to Fox and Newsmax are joining forces against new Pentagon guidelines that limit journalists to only cover explicitly authorised info, or lose their Pentagon press credentials. (
Washington Post
)
Comment
: Only one outlet (the right-leaning One America News) signed the new arrangement before yesterday’s deadline. Defence Secretary Hegseth isn’t budging for now, so there’s a chance it’ll end up becoming a First Amendment lawsuit.
🇳🇬
NIGERIA
-
School’s out!
Lecturers at Nigeria’s public universities are on strike just weeks into the new academic year, accusing the government of failing to improve pay and conditions. The sector’s last major strike (in 2022) lasted eight months! (
BBC
)
Extra Intrigue
The Intrigue jobs board
💼
Foreign & Security Policy Director @
Heinrich Böll Foundation
in DC
Political and Communications Internship @
British Embassy
in Santiago
Postdoc Researcher, Democracy Work Revisited
@
Hertie School
in Berlin
Senior Operations Assistant
@
Asian Development Bank
in Solomon Islands
Meme of the day
Courtesy of our meme-lord @DickerPiccs.
Oh… just us?
Anyway, don’t forget to follow Intrigue for more gold across all our socials! That’s
X
,
Bluesky
,
Insta
,
Facebook
,
YouTube
, and
LinkedIn
lol.
Today’s poll
Do you think outlets should be able to report on national security leaks?
⛔ No way, leaks could harm national security
🖋️ Yep, the press must be free
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Who do you think deserves most credit for this Gaza peace deal?
🇺🇸
Trump (40%)
🇮🇱
Netanyahu (2%)
🏴
Hamas (1%)
🗣️ Mediators like Qatar and Egypt (31%)
✊
Protestors around the world (23%)
✍️ Other (write us!) (4%)
Your two cents:
🇺🇸
J.S:
“Love him or hate him, gotta credit Trump for pushing this deal through. Whether it holds or not is another question.”
✊
D.M:
“Protestors made this an issue that world leaders HAD to care about, putting pressure on key players to pursue any sort of deal.”
🗣️ A.P:
“As in any deal, it's the people who do the preparation work who make it happen, and get no credit when it is done.”