URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/media-tycoon-jimmy-lai-trial-hong-kong
Title: 🌍 Media tycoon Jimmy Lai on trial in Hong Kong

Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Hong Kong is one of my favourite cities in the world. It actually boasts some incredible wilderness, with over 40% of the city designated as country parks and more than 250 islands nearby with sandy beaches and jungle hikes.
I feel lucky to have done a stint there as a diplomat back in 2019. This is especially so because I ended up witnessing the mass Hong Kong democracy protests that year.
A moment I’ll never forget was
watching from my apartment
as an estimated two million protestors marched through Hennessy Road, and thinking there’d been a sense of collective optimism for Hong Kongers.
But fast forward to 2023, and things couldn’t be more different - as
former media mogul Jimmy Lai
has no doubt learned. Today’s briefing leads with an update on his highly anticipated court appearance in Hong Kong.
- Helen Zhang, Co-Founder
PS
- We’ll publish our last briefing for the year this Friday 22 December, before hitting your inboxes again with a special edition in the new year!
Not a subscriber? Join here!
TODAY’S NEWS
Calls for a ceasefire continue.
The British and German foreign ministers, two staunch Israel allies, have used a joint
article
in yesterday’s Sunday Times to say they “
support a ceasefire [in Gaza], but only if it is sustainable
.” The two ministers also write that “
too many civilians have been killed. The Israeli government should do more to discriminate sufficiently between terrorists and civilians.”
Red alert.
Shipping giant Maersk has announced it’s suspending all cargo traffic through the Red Sea after continued attacks by Houthi groups. And that’s a worry, because 12% of global trade passes through the Red Sea. The UK and US say they downed 15 suspected Houthi drone attacks over the weekend.
Rejected (again).
Chileans rejected a new conservative-leaning constitution in a vote yesterday, opting to keep their country’s current Pinochet-era document. A previous attempt to replace the constitution with a left-leaning draft also failed last year. Third time’s the charm? Unlikely - President Boric has said he won’t push for another attempt.
Kuwait Emir passes away.
Sheikh Nawaf al-Ahmad al-Jaber al-Sabah, the Emir of Kuwait, died at 86 years of age after a brief three-year rule of the country. His brother, 83, will succeed him at the helm.
TOP STORY
Our co-founder Helen was serving in Hong Kong as a diplomat during the 2019 protests. This is one of the many photos she took of the events that year.
Media tycoon Jimmy Lai on trial in Hong Kong
76-year-old billionaire and pro-democracy media tycoon Jimmy Lai has appeared in a Hong Kong court today. If he’s convicted on charges of collusion and sedition (as widely expected), he could face a life sentence.
Who's Jimmy Lai?
His story is
legendary
among locals. He fled mainland China in 1960 at age 12, arriving in Hong Kong as a stowaway on a fishing boat. Lai then worked in a garment factory before founding hit clothing chain Giordano (similar to The Gap).
Appalled by the Tiananmen Square massacre of 1989, he became
an outspoken critic
of the Chinese Communist Party, which responded by threatening to close his mainland stores. So Lai sold his Giordano shares and started a media venture, before eventually launching his popular Apple Daily tabloid in 1995.
Starting just before the UK
returned control
of Hong Kong to China in 1997, the newspaper became
a local hit
with its mix of gossip and fearless reporting.
What allegations is he facing?
The specifics are still under wraps, but authorities are basically accusing Lai of:
Colluding with foreign forces, and
Conspiring to publish seditious material.
Lai was among the highest-profile supporters of the 2019 mass pro-democracy protests, and he
met senior US figures
like Vice President Pence at the time. Beijing wasn’t happy, and state media
referred
to him as a “
traitor
”.
So, shortly after China imposed its national security law on Hong Kong in June 2020, authorities detained Lai and started moving against his executives too.
The paper then published its
last edition
on 21 June, 2021, selling out in hours.
In making their case, it seems prosecutors may point to Lai’s meetings with foreign officials plus his newspaper's final front page, which they say called for sanctions on China.
Nobody is expecting a verdict until mid 2024 at the earliest.
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
It’s hard to see this ending without a conviction and more jail time for Lai. The question is just how much more jail time, and on what basis.
In the meantime, there are a few factors that make this case really stand out. First,
there’s Lai himself
:
While many other pro-democracy figures managed to escape abroad or have pled guilty, Lai has stayed and is fighting the charges
He’s also one of the few Hong Kong tycoons who’s openly criticised Beijing, and
Lai’s company is the first Hong Kong-listed firm to be targeted under Beijing’s new national security laws.
So there’s a lot here for Hong Kongers. And second,
there’s the charges
:
The actions in question were once not only normal practice in Hong Kong, but actually won Lai several journalism awards
The principles in question (like freedom of expression and an independent judiciary) also helped make Hong Kong itself successful as a regional finance hub, and
The whole case will play further into US-China tensions, as prosecutors seemingly argue that the millions of Hong Kongers protesting in 2019 were doing Washington’s bidding, at Lai’s urging.
So there’s a lot here for the world, too.
Also worth noting:
Lai is already serving time for earlier convictions related to a lease violation, a Tiananmen vigil, and the 2019 extradition bill protests.
Beijing
claims
Lai was "
a mastermind of the riots
" and that he "
blatantly colluded with external forces to undermine China’s national security
". The case has been met with criticism in
the UK
,
the US
, and
the EU
, as well as
The Committee to Protect Journalists
, and even among
Catholic bishops
(Lai is a Catholic convert).
In its annual
World Press Freedom Index
, Reporters Without Borders now
ranks
Hong Kong 140th out of 180 countries and territories, down from 18th two decades ago. China is ranked at 179th.
Share the Intrigue
SUPPORTED BY INCOGNI
Identity Theft Affects 1 in 3 Americans
… and how do these crooks get ahold of your personal info? Data brokers. They buy (and sell) your address, phone number, and SSN on the internet, profiting off your misfortune.
Incogni helps you fight back. It hunts down your sensitive data and scrubs it from the internet, confronting data brokers on your behalf. Help protect yourself from identity theft, robo calls, or scammers attacking your credit. Don’t wait, readers can
get 60% off Incogni today with code INTRIGUE
.
Get 60% off now!
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇰🇵
North Korea
: The North Korean military fired a
short-range ballistic missile
approximately 570km into the sea off Japan yesterday (Sunday). Pyongyang has tested more than 100 missiles since the beginning of 2022, each one a violation of international law.
🇷🇸
Serbia
: The Serbian Progressive Party of President Aleksandar Vučić has claimed a big
win in the snap election
Serbia held yesterday. The opposition Serbia Against Violence alliance, which emerged following two mass shootings in May, is projected to come in second.
🇰🇭
Cambodia
: The Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York has announced it will
repatriate 16 ancient artefacts
to Cambodia and Thailand. Cambodia’s culture ministry says it’s
“eager for further returns and acknowledgements of the truth regarding our lost national treasures.”
🇧🇧
Barbados
: A Barbados-based company is partnering with a San Francisco-based health tech company to
release dengue-fighting mosquitoes
across the Caribbean. The Americas region has reported a record 4 million cases of dengue this year.
🇮🇷
Iran
: Gunmen killed 11 people and wounded eight others at a
police station in south-eastern Iran
on Friday morning. State TV said the assailants were members of a Baluch separatist militant group.
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Your weekly roundup of the world’s funnier news
Farmers in rural France have started to
turn traffic signs upside down
in protest at various grievances, causing confusion among many a motorist.
European Commission President von der Leyen’s latest address to parliament has been greeted by…
a barking dog
. The pooch was later revealed to be a service animal accompanying a visitor.
The Doritos chip brand is releasing a limited edition
nacho cheese chip spirit
just in time for the holidays.
Zimbabwe’s finance minister has been named ‘
Best African Finance Minister of the Year
’, prompting one local netizen to say it’s "
akin to applauding a captain for steering a ship straight into an iceberg
".
A Venetian
gondola has capsized
after tourists refused to stop taking selfies and sit down.
And Australia’s own Andrew 'The Annihilator' Ngai has won the
Microsoft Excel World Championship
in Vegas for a third year in a row.
PROFILE OF THE DAY
Frank Creyelman. Credits: Aerts Marc.
The Financial Times is
reporting
that Chinese spies ran former Belgian senator Frank Creyelman as an intelligence asset for more than three years. The evidence is laid out rather starkly in years of texts, including one from his Beijing handler saying pretty bluntly that “
our purpose is to divide the US-European relationship
”.
Over the years, Beijing reportedly instructed Creyelman to attack a researcher for his studies of Uyghur internment camps, disrupt a conference on Taiwan, and convince two members of the European Parliament to publicly state that the US and UK were undermining the EU’s energy security.
Interestingly, there’s little evidence Creyelman ever succeeded.
DAILY POLL
What do you think Jimmy Lai's trial means for Hong Kong?
🔥 It ends the turmoil of 2019, enabling the city to retain its finance hub status
⚖️ It ends the rights and freedoms that enabled the city to prosper in the first place
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think foreign policy should be taught in high schools?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🧑‍🏫
Yes, and make it mandatory! (55%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️
✅
Yes, but optional only (41%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🤔
No, it's better left for later (7%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!)  (2%)
Your two cents:
🧑‍🏫
H.J:
“Teaching kids that their decisions have global impacts and how the global economy and political alliances work is increasingly important in a globalized world.”
🤔
S.H:
“Anything that is systemically taught on a field which has a spectrum of opinions will not be able to accommodate such a wide diversity of ideas effectively, and there is a much higher likelihood of introducing personal biases instead.”
✅
R.J:
“If anything needs to be mandatory it should be domestic policy and, more importantly, the importance of local/regional governments in one's day-to-day lives.”
To our surprise, this question generated the most responses ever (over a thousand!)
Share the newsletter