URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/meet-the-uk-s-new-spymaster-89cb6d03e866c39d
Title: 🌍 Meet the UK's new spymaster

Today’s briefing:
— Meet the UK’s new spymaster
— Your Iran-Israel latest
— A punstoppable competition
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. I was pretty bummed when the James Bond franchise decided not to go with a Jane Bond for their next 007 casting. A real missed opportunity for the legendary Gillian Anderson to deliver the series’ iconic “
shaken, not stirred
” line, in my humble opinion.
Thankfully, we’ve now got a real-life Jane Bond in MI6 — Blaise Metreweli. She’s had a stellar career as one of the UK’s star intelligence officers, and is now heading the entire agency as MI6’s first female chief in *
checks notes
*… 116 years.
As we’ll see in today’s top story, she’s got her work cut out for her.
Quick update:
Israel-Iran conflict
Strikes
- While the war’s tempo appears to have eased, Israel has now struck Iran’s state TV studios and is claiming a hit on Iran’s new military chief, barely days after killing his predecessor. Meanwhile, Israel has intercepted most of Iran’s own ~30 latest missiles, though there’ve been impacts around Tel Aviv.
Evacuation order
- President Trump’s tweet urging locals to “
immediately evacuate
” Tehran appears to have accelerated a highway exodus out of Iran’s capital, though it’s unclear what the president might’ve had in mind.
Nuclear
-
President Trump has also reiterated Iran cannot be allowed nukes, after Iran’s parliament announced a possible bill to ditch the nuclear non-proliferation treaty (which Israel has long declined to sign).
Talks
- There’ve been rumours Iran is putting out feelers to re-engage in talks, prompting the US president to remark “
they should have done that before
” (though there are reports US-Iran talks could be back on this week).
G7
- The G7 nations have backed Israel and called Iran “
the principal source of regional instability and terror
”, while President Trump has left the summit early to work on something “
much bigger
” than any ceasefire. He might be weighing up:
a)
Hitting Iran’s underground Fordow nuclear site
with US bunker busters — that’d fit his
tough-on-Iran
branding and further cripple Iran’s nuclear program, though it’d go against his more isolationist instincts, or
b)
Pushing a weakened Iran to ditch its nuclear program
— that’d fit his
peace-through-strength
branding, though might entail granting the regime an out (something Trump long criticised in earlier deals), or
c)
Figuring this out as he goes
(he’s open about his reliance on instinct).
Meanwhile, the guy with
out
a lot of options right now is
Iran’s supreme leader
— it’s hard to see his regime rebounding from this week, with his nuclear, ballistic, and proxy strategies all gutted, and his own credibility in pieces.
MI6 gets a new ‘C’
Who is Blaise Metreweli?
Every now and then, the public gets a glimpse beyond the veil. Take this week, with news the UK’s new foreign intelligence agency (MI6) spymaster will be
Blaise Metreweli
.
In his big
reveal
, PM Starmer endorsed her “
excellent leadership
” and noted she’s being promoted to ‘
C
’ (chief, though the ‘C’ derives from the surname of the original MI6 boss).
She takes the top job after several years serving as ‘
Q
’ (quartermaster — head of MI6’s famous high-tech division). But
what else can we glean?
First
,
her limited public bio is no surprise — C is traditionally the only MI6 staff member publicly named, and it turns out the 47-year-old Metreweli has spent her entire 26-year career deep on the inside. But like any good spy, maybe she’s been hiding in plain sight:
Turns out she’s
a good rower
and was on Cambridge’s winning 1997 team
She’s appeared in some public records as a ‘civil servant’ over the years
Some of the old public references to her are vague on dates (likely to allow a plausible explanation for her time off the grid doing MI6’s wild training), and
Last year, the king himself
honoured
Metreweli, though he referred to her blandly as a foreign ministry “
director general
”, leaving her old college to then proudly (if conspicuously vaguely)
highlight
such a big win.
Second
, it turns out Metreweli has spoken with the media before, including:
A 2022
in
terview
under the name ‘
Ada
’, to encourage more women to join, and
A 2021
interview
while on secondment to the domestic sister agency MI5 — referred to simply by her then ‘
Director K
’ job title (focused on thwarting threats from hostile states), she urged parliament to update the UK’s old espionage laws.
Third
, from the clues above (plus her uncommon surname), a family story emerges:
She likely grew up in
Hong Kong
due to her dad’s work as a top radiologist, and
Her
Georgian
surname might’ve come via her great-grandfather, who escaped the Bolshevik invasion and then married a German woman, who in turn went on to appear in German media as one of her state’s oldest locals!
Then
fourth
, a vague professional picture starts to emerge, too:
Metreweli studied anthropology at
Cambridge
and applied to become a British diplomat, but something about her application (like her intrepid upbringing) meant she got diverted into the MI6 recruitment process, and joined in 1999
She’s served abroad in Europe and
the Middle East
— that’s typically posing as an embassy diplomat (official cover) or as someone out in the broader community (non-official cover), and
She apparently speaks excellent
Arabic
.
On that last one, allow us to conclude with the ol’ diplomat language training joke, that only the first 20 years of Arabic are the hardest.
Intrigue’s Take
So after linking together all these breadcrumbs, here are three broader observations about
what Metreweli’s appointment might mean
:
First
, her stint as ‘Q’ is a reminder of
tech
’s role in today’s intelligence world: you need it not only so your teams and their sources can evade hostile surveillance, or thwart tech-enabled threats, but also to better fuse tech with MI6’s old-school human intelligence to stay ahead in an increasingly fragmenting world.
Second
, as a spook who’s already been in the
media
,
she’s an example of how Western spies seem increasingly focused on preserving and strengthening their social license: democracies either demystify and humanise their security services, or sceptics will fill the void (all gleefully fanned by hostile states), and
Third
, the two points above hint at the
tough gig
awaiting Metreweli once she starts in October: Intriguers will already know our world is getting more hostile — her predecessor just warned the world is now at its most dangerous in 40 years. And that not only raises the stakes, but also (together with tech advancements) shrinks the space available for intelligence agencies to recruit new sources.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
Boxabl
Why 50,000+ Investors Are Backing BOXABL's Vision.
You may have heard about
BOXABL
and their mission to revolutionize the outdated construction industry. BOXABL homes are manufactured in our Las Vegas factory, folded for transport, and then unfolded on-site in just an hour.
Here's a quick recap of why we believe
BOXABL
is poised for massive disruption:
Delivered a prototype order to
SpaceX
in 2020.
Project order for 156 homes from the
DoD
completed in 2021.
Built over 700 homes to date.
Actively delivering to both developers and individual consumers.
Reserved the
Nasdaq ticker symbol $BXBL
!
Raised over
$200 million
from over 50,000 investors since 2020.
BOXABL’s crowdfunding round,
at just $0.80 per share,
will close on June 24th.
Invest in BOXABL Today
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇷🇺
RUSSIA
-
Ex-defence minister lands in North Korea (again).
State outlets report that Putin has sent his confidante and former defence chief Sergei Shoigu to North Korea with unspecified “
special instructions
”, in what’s now Shoigu’s third visit in as many months. (
The Moscow Times
)
Comment:
Building on the security pact Putin himself signed with Kim in Pyongyang last year, Shoigu is probably in town pushing for more arms and/or troop support for Putin’s invasion of Ukraine, which is still inching forward at staggering cost.
🇮🇱
ISRAEL
-
More casualties near Gaza aid site.
Witnesses are reporting dozens dead and ~200 injured amid allegations the Israeli military opened fire near an aid distribution site. Israel says it’s investigating. (
BBC
)
🇩🇪
GERMANY
-
First Veterans Day.
Germany has marked its first-ever Veterans Day since its post-Cold War reunification, in a rare public celebration of the country’s military. (
DW
)
Comment
: Add this to the list of the ways capitals — even those wary of their own histories — are revisiting their military roles in a startling new world.
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
Xi’s Central Asia play continues.
China’s Xi Jinping has landed in Kazakhstan to kick off today’s China–Central Asia Summit, as he continues to milk Russia’s declining regional influence. (
Al Jazeera
)
🇵🇪
PERU
-
Earthquake shakes the capital.
A 5.6 earthquake has rocked the capital of Lima, killing one and injuring five. (
CNN
)
Comment
: Lima is already facing a rolling series of political, security, and economic crises, so it must be feeling a sense of “not now” as Mother Nature enters the chat.
🇺🇬
UGANDA
-
You
get a trial,
you
get a trial!
Long-time Ugandan strongman Yoweri Museveni has signed an amendment allowing military courts to try any civilians found with military equipment. Critics argue it’ll just allow Museveni to further crack down on his opponents. (
BBC
)
Extra Intrigue
Our commodities corner is back:
Sugar
: Sugar futures have tumbled on expectations of a
supply increase from India and Thailand
, citing favourable monsoon rains and increased acreage.
Diamonds
: Anglo American seems set to
sell its 85% stake in diamond giant De Beers
, notwithstanding the state of the diamond market.
Mining
: South Korean refiner Korea Zinc has invested $85M in Canada’s The Metals Company (TMC), in a boost
for TMC’s plans to mine the seafloor
.
Arts and crafts of the day
Credits: Lambeth Country Show.
As lovers of foreign affairs, horticulture, and puns
, you can imagine our delight at discovering the UK’s Lambeth Country Show annual vegetable sculpture competition, featuring a little papal ‘
Corn-clave
’ above, plus another classic called ‘
Twin-Leeks
’ in homage to legendary director David Lynch, who passed away earlier this year.
Today’s poll
What skill do you think is most important for modern spies?
🗺️ Foreign languages
👫 Human connection
💻 Tech skills
✍️ Other (write us!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
How do you think this Israel-Iran conflict will end?
🤝
A ceasefire and not much change (21%)
🇮🇷
A weakened Iran agreeing to a nuclear deal (46%)
🚀
A nuclear-armed Iran (12%)
🇮🇱
A more isolated Israel (18%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (3%)
Your two cents:
🇮🇷
R.N:
“Iran does not have the weapons to continue without help from Russia or China.”
🚀
V:
“Israel can't bust the bunkers, Iran will rush to the bomb, and other regimes will take the lesson.”
✍️
P.M:
“Regime change in Iran.”
✍️
C.D.J:
“I've studied war for over a half century; practiced it over two decades; taught it for another two at military academies and even the Pentagon. When it comes to predicting war, I agree with Clausewitz that it is easier to start a war than control it.”