URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/mercenaries-are-still-a-thing
Title: 🌍 Mercenaries are still a thing

IN TODAY’S EDITION
1️⃣ Mercenaries are still a thing
2️⃣ Flag of the day
3️⃣ Your Friday quiz
Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
There are so many ways to learn a language these days. The champagne option is, of course, to go and live in the country and soak it right up.
Then there’s the LaCroix option, which involves using ChatGPT’s conversation mode as a personal AI tutor who’ll listen to your rusty mandarin then verbally offer corrections when you confuse your 好用 with your 有用 (lol, total rookie error amirite?).
But today, dear Intriguer, I present to you the Big Gulp option, in three easy steps: first, think of a trashy TV show you love but feel guilty watching and would
never
admit in front of 110,000 people reading your daily geopolitics briefing that you’re secretly a fan. For me, it’s the Netflix reality dating show,
Love is Blind
.
Second, check if they’ve launched versions in other countries, and you might see that yep, there’s now a
Love is Blind
in Argentina, Brazil, Germany, Japan, Mexico, Sweden, and the UAE. Then third, slap on some captions, and next thing you know, you’re not only
completely
invested in whether Willy will be able to confront his fear of commitment and truly build a future with Francesca. You’ll also be practising your Spanish.
Now, let’s talk about mercenaries.
THE HEADLINES
Japanese nuclear NGO wins 2024 Nobel Peace Prize.
The Japan Confederation of A-Bomb and H-Bomb Sufferers’ Organisations – commonly known as Hidankyo –
has just received the accolade
“
for its efforts to achieve a world free of nuclear weapons and for demonstrating through witness testimony that nuclear weapons must never be used again.
”
22 reported dead after Israeli strikes on central Beirut.
The strikes, the
second bout targeting central Beirut
in as many weeks, hit near the French embassy and the National Museum. Initial word is the target (a Hezbollah official) evaded the assassination attempt. Meanwhile, Italy has summoned the Israeli ambassador after the UN said Israeli forces fired a tank shell at a UN peacekeeping facility in southern Lebanon, injuring two. Italy is one of 50 countries contributing to the 10,000-strong UN mission in the area, which has been running since 1978.
A ‘whatever it takes’ moment for China?
China-watchers and investors alike will be glued to their screens tomorrow (Saturday), when the country’s finance minister is due to give a highly-anticipated briefing. Reuters
reported last month that Beijing was planning new stimulus to the tune of 2 trillion yuan
($284B), though some question whether even that would be enough to turn China’s economy around.
Gunmen kill 20 in Pakistan coal mines.
While no group has claimed
responsibility for the attack
, it occurred in Pakistan’s restive Balochistan province, home to a long-running secessionist movement (which we just
covered
on Tuesday).
China detains four employees of Taiwan’s iPhone-maker.
Authorities in China have apprehended
four Foxconn workers
in circumstances Taiwan is describing as “
strange
”. The employees were reportedly taken in on vague "
breach of trust
" charges, and it could be a case of more pressure from the mainland, which claims Taiwan as its own.
TOP STORY
Mercenaries are still a thing
Earlier this week, a Russian court sentenced US citizen Stephen Hubbard to nearly seven years in prison on mercenary charges.
The court alleges Hubbard signed a contract with a territorial defence unit after moving to Ukraine in 2014, and earned around $1,000/month to fight with Ukrainian troops defending against Russia. He was then detained in April 2022.
Hubbard’s story, coupled with reports North Korea could be sending its citizens to help Russia invade Ukraine, got us thinking about how foreign citizens increasingly end up fighting in conflicts thousands of miles away.
Why?
There are as many reasons as there are combatants, but some of the most common explanations include:
Cash
- The starting salary for a junior burger in (for example) the French Foreign Legion is around $1700 per month (net), while elite contractors in combat zones can earn upwards of $25k per month.
Creed
- Some foreigners identify so deeply with a cause, they just pack their bags and head on over, though these decisions can sometimes be shaped by propaganda, radicalisation, and even deceit (eg, various folks from Cuba, Nepal, Sierra Leone, and Somalia have been duped into joining Russia’s invasion).
And
citizenship
- Countries struggling to hit their military recruitment goals sometimes offer fast-tracked citizenship for folks willing to enlist - we’re talking not only about wartime economies like Ukraine and Russia, but also places like Australia.
Anyway, while we’re on the topic, here are four stories you might not’ve heard before:
Simon Mann
🇬🇧
He’s a former officer in Britain’s elite
Special Air Service
who, after the first Gulf War, tried his luck in the oil and diamond industry before becoming a mercenary for the Angolan government, which was fighting a rival faction in its own civil war at the time.
Mann then went on to co-found his own mercenary company,
Sandline International
, which rose to infamy after it emerged on the other side of the world in Papua New Guinea, where the government had contracted it to help quell a secessionist movement.
But things somehow got even more intriguing in 2004, when Mann and 66 others were arrested during a stopover in
Zimbabwe
. Authorities accused them of being en route to overthrow the government of Equatorial Guinea. The son of Margaret Thatcher even pleaded guilty (under a plea deal) to helping finance the operation.
In the end, the Zimbabweans sentenced Mann to prison before extraditing him in 2007 to face charges in
Equatorial Guinea
, where a court sentenced him to another 34 years behind bars - he got a presidential pardon on humanitarian grounds two years later.
And yes, he obviously went on to write it all down in an autobiography.
Duberney Capador
🇨🇴
Capador joined
Colombia’s special forces
once he turned 18, then spent the next two decades fighting against rebel guerrillas in the country’s south.
But then an intriguing job offer apparently emerged in 2019 to work for a Miami-based security firm known as ‘
CTU Security
’ - they said they were putting together a 400-man platoon to protect the political elite of an unknown country for $3k each per month.
A couple of years later, Capador and several other compatriots touched down in
Haiti
where they awaited further details of their assignment. Then on July 7 2021, he and his group attacked the home of President Moise, killing the president and injuring the first lady.
It’s all shrouded in mystery, but
leaked WhatsApp
messages
suggest Capador and others then became trapped when their plot to install a former judge as president didn’t pan out. Rather, police ended up killing Capador and three others, while arresting another 20 who are still being prosecuted. The former first lady has even been listed as a suspect.
Samuel Wesley Hall
🇺🇸
A former Olympic silver medallist diver and member of the Ohio House of Representatives, Sam Hall became a self-described “
volunteer counterterrorist
”, travelling to foreign countries to back anti-communist groups like the Contras.
While some of his stories sound a tad far-fetched, he once described parachuting into
Angola
to rescue captured Canadians, and training Latin American groups in guerrilla warfare, before being apprehended in
Nicaragua
in 1986 on suspicions of being a spy.
Hall later claimed he was conducting reconnaissance for a privately financed group called the
Phoenix Battalion
, which had been battling the Sandinista rebels who ultimately seized power. The then (and current, lol) Nicaraguan leader Daniel Ortega ended up releasing Hall within two months, and Hall passed away decades later in Florida in 2014.
Eduardo Rózsa-Flores
🇧🇴
/
🇭🇺
Working for Spanish/Catalan newspaper ‘La Vanguardia’ and the
Spanish BBC
service, Rózsa-Flores was covering the Balkans War in Yugoslavia when he suddenly swapped out his mic for a rifle to fight for Croatian independence.
He then went on to lead the movement’s 300-strong foreign legion, faced allegations of human rights abuses, and a decade later, starred in a movie based on his own life, which ended up winning
gold at Hungary’s film festival
.
But then in 2009 on the opposite side of the world,
Bolivian
police conducted a deadly raid on a hotel in the city of Santa Cruz. And who should be found among the fallen? None other than Rózsa-Flores, of course. Authorities claimed he was part of a plot to overthrow President Evo Morales, though this remains contested.
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
As tech blurs borders, we’re seeing more and more local citizens getting captivated by distant causes, then heading off in pursuit of heroism, infamy, or just cold hard cash.
But from the perspective of ex-diplomats like us, these kinds of stories are mostly just nightmare scenarios. Local officials inevitably accuse you and your home government of somehow being involved in the plot. Many then use these captives as a bargaining chip on other issues, or just as an excuse to make life difficult.
And while the sentences, court cases, and negotiations all play out, you’ve still got to afford these compatriots their consular rights, which typically means going and visiting them in some distant jail every 12 weeks to ensure they’ve got adequate access to double-ply toilet paper, organic toothpaste, and the last few editions of
Us Weekly
. That or making sure they get a meal each day.
Become a diplomat, they said. See the world, they said.
Also worth noting:
A
1989 UN treaty
prohibits states from recruiting, using, financing and training mercenaries.
Another
story now playing out
: just last month, a court in Congo DRC handed down the death penalty for 37 defendants involved in an attempted coup in May. Six of them are foreigners from the US, UK, Belgium and Canada.
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇰🇬
Kyrgyzstan
: Press freedom advocates were alarmed yesterday (Thursday) when a
Kyrgyz court handed two journalists prison sentences
and two others probation for
“inciting unrest”.
The journalists were accused of publishing stories which called for protests, a charge they denied.
🇷🇺
Russia
: President Putin has signed a decree
withdrawing his ambassador from the US
, though without naming a successor. Anatoly Antonov, who is under Western sanctions for Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, had hinted in July that his posting (held since 2017) was coming to an end.
🇲🇾
Malaysia
: Malaysia could now reach
‘high-income nation status’
as soon as 2028,
according to the World Bank
, placing it ahead of every other Southeast Asian country apart from Singapore. A Bank official said that, while Malaysia’s economy is in a good place, it needs to unwind subsidies and tackle underemployment to maintain the momentum.
🇲🇶
Martinique
: The French island in the Caribbean has
experienced a wave of protests
over high food prices in recent weeks, but the marches turned violent on Wednesday evening with looting and police clashes. While the immediate official response has been to ban protests and impose a curfew, protestors want authorities to align prices with mainland France (40% cheaper).
🇸🇦
Saudi Arabia
: The Saudis have narrowly
failed to win a seat on the UN Human Rights Council
after a secret ballot at the General Assembly saw smaller rivals like the Marshall Islands nab a seat instead. Saudi Arabia had already tried and failed to win a seat back in 2020, but civil society groups continue to campaign against the Gulf kingdom due to its human rights record.
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Some weekend recommendations from Team Intrigue
Read
: Learn about the battle to
scale up microbe farms
that can turn carbon monoxide into biofuel.
Listen
: Hear from the writer who once claimed that “
the Metaverse will revolutionize everything
”, and why
he’s still a true believer
in the spatial internet today.
Watch
:
If you’d rather get your reality TV fix in English,
Love is Blind DC
premiered last week
, sending Washington into a frenzy as the political town watches romance unfold (and wince at
just
how small this capital feels at times).
FLAG OF THE DAY
What - and we cannot stress this enough - is going on with this flag?
The medieval tree-legged fidget spinner emblem you see above belongs to the
Isle of Man
, a tiny, self-governing British Crown Dependency located between Northern Ireland and Great Britain. Technically called a ‘triskelion’, the symbol dates back to Greek antiquity but its exact link to the Isle of Man remains obscure — it appears to stem from the Scottish takeover of the island back in 1265.
So… what’s it even mean? Are the island’s residents eternally prepared to hit leg day at the gym. Are they ready at a moment’s notice for a joust, jaunt, jig, or journey?
The answer might lie in the territory’s Latin motto dating back to at least 1668:
‘Quocunque Jeceris Stabit’,
or
‘Wherever you throw it, it will stand’.
Extra fun fact:
long-time Intriguers will recall the Sicilian flag looks very similar, though its own tri-legged emblem appears without armour.
FRIDAY QUIZ
Today the UN celebrates the International Day of the Girl Child.
1) What is the enrollment rate for girls in primary and secondary schools, worldwide?
67%
88%
90%
93%
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) How many girls become child brides every year?
2 million
7 million
10 million
12 million
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) Which country has the highest ratio of women to men?
Armenia
Jamaica
Belarus
Hong Kong
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Was this forwarded to you? We're a team of ex-diplomats producing a concise and engaging geopolitical briefing for 100k+ leaders each day.
It’s free to subscribe
.