URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/mexico-reaches-china-help-fentanyl-crisis
Title: 🌍  Mexico reaches out to China for help with fentanyl crisis

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
World leaders are really just like us: look at how peeved they get when someone leaks their private chats.
Xi Jinping scolded Justin Trudeau
over it, and Macron
dunked on an Australian PM
for doing it. Even close allies
the US and Australia
were briefly reduced to frenemy status over a leaked chat. So maybe it’s time for a truce: no leaked DMs.
Note:
We’ll be taking tomorrow (Friday) and Monday off, but we’ll be back in your inboxes on Tuesday 11 April! In the meantime, we’d like to wish a happy Easter and Passover to our readers celebrating. See you soon
😊
!
Today’s briefing is a 4.8 min read:
🇲🇽
Mexico’s
president calls on Xi Jinping to help stop the fentanyl trade.
🇵🇰
Pakistan’s
supreme court rules against the government.
➕
Plus:
The US enters WWI on this day in history, how the papers are covering a visit to China by Macron and von der Leyen, and a look into Syria’s re-emergence on the global stage.
🎤
PS
: Intrigue co-founder Helen and the Lowy Institute’s Hervé Lemahieu are in the running to speak at SXSW Sydney this year! We’d love it if you could help by
voting
(no sign-up required, just two seconds to hit ‘vote’).
🗺️ AROUND THE WORLD
🇹🇼
Taiwan
: Continuing her tour of the Americas, Taiwanese President
Tsai Ing-wen met with US House Speaker
Kevin McCarthy in Los Angeles yesterday (Wednesday). In response, China sent an aircraft carrier group off Taiwan’s coast.
🏴󠁧󠁢󠁳󠁣󠁴󠁿
Scotland
: The husband of former Scottish first minister Nicola Sturgeon was
arrested yesterday (Wednesday
). Initial media reports suggest he may have misused party finances. Sturgeon unexpectedly resigned in February.
🇳🇿
New Zealand
: Former prime minister Jacinda Ardern delivered
her final speech
to Parliament yesterday (Wednesday), marking her official retirement from politics. She now plans to join the board of trustees of Prince William’s environmental non-profit.
🇵🇪
Peru
: Football’s governing body FIFA said it would
move its U-17 tournament
to a new host country after it said Peru had failed to prepare adequately. Peru has been struggling with nationwide protests since December.
🇮🇱
Israel
: Security forces
arrested around 350 Palestinians
during clashes at the Al-Aqsa mosque in Jerusalem yesterday (Wednesday). The incident has raised fears of a wider escalation in violence.
🇲🇽
MEXICO | NARCOTICS
AMLO asks Xi for help combatting drug trafficking
Briefly:
Mexican President Andrés Manuel López Obrador (aka AMLO) announced on Tuesday he had sent a letter to Chinese President Xi Jinping seeking China’s help in controlling drug shipments across the Pacific.
At issue is fentanyl
: a synthetic opiate often produced in Mexico (something AMLO denies) with chemicals from China (something AMLO highlights) and consumed in the US (a crisis which AMLO partly blames on a
lack of hugs
).
By publicising
his letter
, AMLO hopes to deflect mounting US criticism that Mexico isn’t doing enough to stem the flow of fentanyl to the US.
But Beijing won’t be happy
about being dragged into the spotlight like this. As we flagged in today’s intro above, a world leader publicly releasing a private letter is a little like screenshotting a private group chat: not cool.
Plus Mexico already has a complex relationship with China: the two have long seen one another as
competitors in the US market
, and Mexican officials
still fume
over China’s response to Mexico’s H1N1 outbreak in 2009.
Intrigue’s take:
Xi Jinping has yet to respond to AMLO’s letter, which was dated 22 March. And how
does
one respond to such a letter? It blames China, while also describing US attitudes as
“absurd, manipulative, propagandistic and demagogic.”
Privately, Xi may well agree with the latter sentiment. But his advisors will likely remind him that AMLO’s audience here - as ever - was also domestic. His letter slips in a reference to Mexico historically resisting the US
“with courage, patriotism and dignity.”
AMLO’s voters might cheer this line, but it’s not exactly relevant to fentanyl.
So yeah, AMLO has somehow managed to antagonise two world powers at once. But back home, he’s still
one of the world’s most popular leaders
.
Also worth noting:
According to the US
Centre for Disease Control and Prevention
, 150 Americans die each day from overdoses related to synthetic opioids like fentanyl.
In August 2022, China
suspended all counternarcotics
and law enforcement cooperation with the United States.
📰
GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES
How different newspapers covered
: French President Emmanuel Macron and EU Commission President Ursula von der Leyen’s trip to China.
Links
:
CNN
,
Xinhua
,
FAZ
.
Today’s briefing is sponsored by
Likewise
Take the Guesswork Out of Finding Your Next Must-Watch Show
Looking for a hassle-free way to discover new TV shows and movies? Let the Likewise “What to Watch” be your go-to source for entertainment recommendations!
Their personalized suggestions are delivered straight to your inbox and are based on what real people are watching and recommending.
With their newsletter, you'll always be up to date on what's new and what's worth watching, so you'll never miss a beat.
Plus, their recommendations are tailored to your preferences, ensuring you'll always find something that fits your mood. Sign up now for free and start enjoying the best of TV and movies today!
Sign up!
🇵🇰
PAKISTAN | POLITICS
Pakistan’s Supreme Court sides with former PM Imran Khan
Briefly:
Pakistan’s Supreme Court ruled on Tuesday that the province of Punjab’s local elections will take place on 14 May, after the country’s electoral commission sought to delay the vote until October.
The ruling is a big victory for former prime minister Imran Khan, whose party used its numbers to dissolve several local assemblies in January. Under Pakistan’s constitution, voting for a new assembly should’ve taken place within 90 days, but the electoral commission said the government hadn’t provided enough funds.
So the Supreme Court
declared the delay unconstitutional and ordered the government to unlock funds for a new round of voting in May.
Intrigue’s take:
Imran Khan may have perfected the art of mischief-making, giving off some solid
Jack Sparrow
vibes lately. And it’s working for him: he remains the
most popular political figure in the country
.
But angry as he may be at how he was
kicked out of office
, each additional gambit tests Pakistan’s institutions in new ways. And in a country already on the brink, those tests could turn dangerous for all involved.
Also worth noting:
Khan said he would
agree to an election delay
if the government would share its plans to hold free and fair general elections in October.
On Tuesday, Pakistan’s central bank
raised its benchmark interest rate to 21%
, the highest since 1956, in an effort to tame 35% inflation.
👀
EXTRA INTRIGUE
What we’re reading about
the Assad regime’s diplomatic re-emergence.
Arab states are normalising ties with Syria’s Assad regime
Egypt, Syria in advanced talks to restore diplomatic relations
Syria’s state capture: the rising influence of Mrs Assad
Saudi Arabia to invite Syria's Assad to Arab League summit
📜
TODAY IN HISTORY
President Wilson addresses Congress in April 1917, calling for a declaration of war against Germany.
Credits: National Archives.
The US declares war against Germany
President Woodrow Wilson signed a congressional war resolution at 1.18pm on this day in 1917. The decision to enter WWI came after Germany had resumed attacks against US merchant ships. Germany had also explored drawing Mexico into the war by offering to help it retake Arizona, New Mexico, and Texas.
🗳️ POLL TIME!
What do you think about AMLO's letter to President Xi?
💯 It's a classic AMLO political stunt, 100%
🆘 It's a genuine plea for China's cooperation on fentanyl
👋 It's a slap directed at the US
☯️ It's a bit of everything
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
What do you think regulators should do with ChatGPT and similar generative AI software?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
⚖️ Regulation is key  (74%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🚫
Ban them all! (8%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🔨
Both regulation and bans just suppress innovation (15%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️  🖋️ Other (write in!)  (3%)
Your two cents:
⚖️
C.C:
“A blanket ban would stop the inevitable and destroy economic capability. Fast regulation, however, is a must. The Government cannot have another Big Tech situation where it's years behind the game.”
🔨
R.V
: “While governmental regulation should be avoided like the plague, entities that adopt AI for critical functions […] should be ready for the customer blowback and lawsuits resulting from [deploying] these under-developed systems.”
🚫
T.L:
“Generative AI is just Intellectual Property theft with extra steps.”