URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/mexico-americas-biggest-supplier
Title: 🌍 Mexico is America's biggest supplier

Today’s newsletter supported by:
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Oh hello there, I didn’t see you come in. I’m John Fowler, co-founder of International Intrigue. As you may have already seen across our socials, newsletter, and on the Times Square Billboard (we wish), the Intrigue team and I are headed to New York City next week to bring you a special edition newsletter from inside the 78th UN General Assembly.
We’ll be covering the ins, outs, and in-betweens of what really goes on during Leaders’ Week in NYC (and we promise it’ll be more than just our gripes about gridlock traffic and eye-wateringly expensive coffees). Get the inside scoop by
signing up here
.
~ John
Today’s briefing is a 5 min read:
🇲🇽
Mexico
is an export powerhouse.
💻
The US takes
Google
to trial.
➕
Plus:
The handshake heard around the world, how the papers are covering stories from the EU, and an island that’s banned Airbnb.
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇹🇼
Taiwan
: A new report by Taiwanese authorities claims China is
ramping up ‘grey zone’ incursions
(activities that are detrimental to Taiwan but not acts of war) to establish a “
new normal
”. Beijing is currently conducting one of its biggest-ever drills in the Pacific.
🇸🇪
Sweden
: Stockholm has announced it’ll
increase its defence budget by nearly 30%
next year, to meet a NATO target of 2% of GDP. The Swedish defence minister called it the “
largest rearmament of the defence force since the 1950s
”.
🇲🇻
Maldives
: No presidential candidate won 50% of the vote in last weekend’s election, meaning the next leader will be chosen in a
run-off at the end of the month
. Opposition candidate Mohamed Muizzu came first at 46%, with a platform that includes limiting India’s presence in the Maldives.
🇨🇴
Colombia
: President Gustavo Petro has proposed forming a
Latin American alliance to tackle drugs
as a health rather than security issue. Petro said 50 years of a war on drugs had resulted in “
immeasurable bloodshed and pain in Latin America
”.
🇳🇬
Nigeria
: The UAE says it’ll
lift its current visa ban on Nigerian travellers
and Emirates Airlines will resume flights to Nigeria. The UAE had imposed these restrictions after Emirates encountered difficulties repatriating $85M in revenue from Nigeria.
🇲🇽
Mexico | Geo-economics
The US has a new top import source
For the first time since 2009, a country has
exported more goods
to the US than China has. That country is Mexico. What’s the story?
🏭 Proximity
: A lot of Mexico’s production is
near the US border
🤝
Integration
: Inputs can criss-cross the border pretty seamlessly
🛃
Treaty
:
The US-
Mexico trade pact has kept tariffs down while harmonising standards, and
🧑
Costs
:
Labour in Mexico now generally costs less than in China
In this context, there’ve been some headline-grabbing moves to Mexico:
🚗
Tesla
is building a ~
$10B gigafactory
near Monterrey, and
🛋️
Even Chinese companies
like upholsterer
ManWah
are in Mexico to cut costs and avoid tariffs, while hedging political risk.
But… while Mexico’s exports are up, these big new inbound
investment
headlines aren’t showing too much in the
data
yet.
Intrigue's take:
So what does this all mean? First, the deterioration of US-China ties might’ve sped up Mexico’s emergence as America’s top supplier, but some of the underlying trends (like
labour costs
) have been a long time coming.
And second, there are lots of reasons to invest in Mexico, but investors are still thinking through other options like Vietnam and India, as well as local issues around
energy
, water, security, and
governance
.
Also worth noting:
Canada remains America’s
top trade partner overall
(i.e., taking into account imports and exports of goods and services).
📰
How newspapers covered…
The European Union
Brussels, Belgium
“Russians can no longer bring their cars to the EU”
New York, US
“EU lawmakers approve a deal to raise renewable energy target to 42.5% of total consumption by 2030”
Oslo, Norway
“In a vote of confidence, Europe is parking massive amounts of gas in Ukraine”
Today’s newsletter is supported by: Deel
Compliantly hire anyone, anywhere, in 5 minutes with Deel
Deel is your one-stop shop for hiring, paying, and managing your remote team. We stay on top of local labor laws across the world to ensure compliance and mitigate risk so that you don’t have to.
Get started.
💻
Google | Tech & regulation
Google goes to court
One of the biggest antitrust trials in US history kicked off yesterday (Tuesday), and this time, it’s Google in the hot seat.
What are the
charges
?
Basically, the US Justice Department says Google has abused its power in order to make its search engine the default option
.
For its part, Google says this default status is a result of its superior product, and consumers can easily switch to another search engine if they want.
Why does this matter?
Google handles ~
83%
of the world’s internet searches
It’s facing probes
in the EU
,
India
,
Indonesia
and beyond, and
If it loses at home, this could shape how the world uses the internet
Intrigue’s take:
Antitrust cases don’t tend to generate as much buzz as celebrity trials, and yet District Judge Amit Mehta has had to set up overflow rooms for spectators and reporters.
But lawmakers around the world are watching too: public trials against Big Tech can set precedents anywhere, regardless of their outcome.
Also worth noting:
This trial is expected to run for around 10 weeks. Judge Mehta will then likely issue his ruling early next year.
The Justice Department is also suing Google for alleged anti-competitive conduct in
digital advertising
.
The Justice Department
sued Microsoft in 1998
. An eventual deal required the company to drastically change some business practices.
➕
Extra Intrigue
What we’re reading about the return of tourism around the world:
Venice to back €5 fee for day-trip tourists
‘Without rules we cannot live’: Greece seeks ways to tackle ‘overtourism’
The future of tourism is sustainable and regenerative
Indian tourists flock to Southeast Asia as China's reopening falters
Malaysian island becomes first tourist destination in Southeast Asia to ban Airbnb
🗳️ Poll time!
Which Big Tech firm do you think is the world's most influential today?
🇺🇸 Google/Alphabet
🇨🇳 Huawei
🇺🇸 Apple
🇹🇼 TSMC
🇰🇷 Samsung
🇺🇸 Microsoft
🇺🇸 Nvidia
🇺🇸 Amazon
🇨🇳 Tencent
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
📜
Today in history
Source: Ron Edmonds/Associated Press
30 years ago today, Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat shook hands on the White House lawn after signing the
first Oslo Accord
. The accords emerged from a series of secret meetings in the Norwegian capital, and saw the two sides agree to "
achieve a just, lasting and comprehensive peace settlement
". Their “
interim period
” for further negotiations ended in May 1999, without reaching a comprehensive treaty.
Yesterday’s poll:
Which 21st century event do you think has most shaped our world so far?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🇺🇸
The 9/11 terrorist attacks  (35%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇨🇳
China's entry into the WTO  (6%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇮🇶
The US-led invasion of Iraq  (5%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️
📱
Apple's first iPhone  (23%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
📉
The Great Recession  (3%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
✊
The Arab Spring (1%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇬🇧
Brexit  (0.4%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️
🦠
COVID-19  (22%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 💣 Russia's invasion of Ukraine (4%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write-in!) (2%)
Your two cents
:
🇺🇸
L.J.H:
“COVID is a close second to 9/11 but probably only because it's been more recent. The reaction to 9/11 has changed so much about the world that it's almost impossible to think about how it would be now had that not happened.”
📱
D
: “[…] Not a day goes by where I don't pick up my iPhone for information, games or even (I know, crazy) communicating with other humans.”
💣
C.C:
“Without any doubt this one single act has moved the nuclear doomsday clock closer to midnight than any other since Hiroshima.”
✍️
D.L.C:
“The advent of social media, which interconnected the world like never before and created a market for misinformation and information alike.”