URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/reduce-302b
Title: 🌍 MI6’s big warning to the world

Today’s briefing:
— MI6’s big warning to the world
— Go work for Patagonia in Italy
— Medusa in the middle
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. I don’t often fangirl, but when I do it’s usually over a female world leader. Why? Because truth be told there are still so few in the public eye, and I love hearing about their life stories and motivations.
Over the last year, I met two of these women. One was Sanna Marin, the former prime minister of Finland. The other one, as I later found out, was Blaise Metreweli, the current head of the UK’s spy agency, MI6. Talk about a real life 007 encounter.
Blaise was not yet appointed when we’d met, and I’m sure she wouldn’t remember me, but I just recall being so impressed by her sharp insights. I’m sure MI6 is keeping her busy these days, but I’d love to grab a coffee again (if you’re reading this, Blaise…). Onto today’s top story on her latest speech with
MI6’s outlook.
PS
- Friday will be our
last regular briefing for the year
, but we’ll be back from
Monday January 5th
, and will keep you posted with some special editions over the break.
Number of the day
43%
That’s the proportion of China’s next generation of Communist Party leaders with doctorates, according to
a new report
from the Asia Society Policy Institute.
Words of warning
UK Secret Intelligence Service chief Blaise Metreweli.
Speeches are usually meant to congratulate, celebrate, or commemorate.
Unless you’re the boss of Britain’s famed MI6 intelligence agency, Blaise Metreweli, who used her
highly-anticipated speech
on Monday to issue a pretty grim wake-up call.
Here’s what she had to say…
“
The front line is everywhere
”
Metreweli, who
emerged from the shadows
to lead MI6 in October, argued the UK (and pretty much everyone else) now faces threats from all sides: “
Online, on our streets, in our supply chains, in the minds and on the screens of our citizens.
”
The bottom line?
Our world’s connectivity — technological, financial, logistical, social — is metastasising from asset to liability.
“
Power itself is becoming more diffuse, more unpredictable
”
Metreweli focussed heavily on tech, sprinkling 18 references to the
familiar risks
of a free world moving too fast, losing its edge, or grappling with “
science-fiction-like tools
” — that last one caught our attention given Metreweli last served as MI6’s infamous tech boss, ‘Q’.
But it was really her take on
power
that stood out: way back in the olden days (aka 1998), you might call the police or your government for help, because that’s where the power sat.
These days?
Metreweli warns that power “i
s shifting from states to corporations, and sometimes to individuals”
, as our governments become reliant on a new tech broligarchy playing by its own rules and in pursuit of its own priorities.
“
We all continue to face the menace of an aggressive, expansionist and revisionist Russia
”
Metreweli also focuses on Russia, warning it’s “
seeking to subjugate Ukraine and harass NATO
”, and is “
testing us in the grey zone with tactics that are just below the threshold of war
” — cyberattacks, disinformation, arson, sabotage, and drone airport stunts.
It’s intriguing for two reasons:
first
, she ditches the classic spymaster’s
horizon-scan
, instead drilling down on her top threat. But
second
, her description of that threat clashes not just with Moscow’s rhetoric, but even DC’s: maybe the root cause isn’t NATO or Ukraine or lousy negotiators, but an aggressive, expansionist, and revisionist Russia.
“
China will be a central part of the global transformation
”
Metreweli’s China shout is interesting not just for its brevity (one line) but also its breeziness, just pledging to keep London in the loop on the implications of Beijing’s rise.
It’s a notch down from her predecessor’s
warning
of “
an increasingly assertive China which sometimes competes with our interests”,
but this seems less about any softening, and more a reflection of her decision to focus on the UK’s immediate threat, Russia.
“MI6’s inbuilt strength is our partners and our people”
It’s the kind of platitude you might see on KPMG’s campus recruitment PowerPoint, but Metreweli used it to answer a question on how she plans to confront her long and grim list: “
together, we integrate our diverse talent, data and tools to meet the threat
”.
So even (especially?) in a fragmenting world, you keep your enemies close and your friends clos
er
.
Intrigue’s Take
It’s worth reflecting on why the UK’s new spymaster opted to ditch the classic horizon scan here: maybe it’s not stylistic flair, or a new speechwriter, or Barry from marketing.
Rather, maybe it’s because the threat is
no longer over the horizon
at all. Instead, it’s…
in the harbour (the
Yantar
spy ship re-entered British waters last month)
in the skies (drones buzzing UK bases, or lasering RAF pilots), and even…
in the streets (arson targeting Ukraine-linked warehouses and industry).
And interestingly, while Metreweli issued this wake-up call, her military counterpart with the incredibly British name of Sir Richard Knighton used his own
Monday speech
to argue what should come next: “
Our objective must be to avoid war. And […] while the price of peace may be rising, the cost of strong
deterrence
is still far, far less than the cost of war.
”
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇻🇪
VENEZUELA
-
Blockade?
A statement out of Caracas has rejected what it describes as President Trump’s “
grotesque threat
”, after the US leader
announced
“
a total and complete blockade of all sanctioned oil tankers going into, and out of, Venezuela.
” (
Yahoo finance
)
Comment:
A blockade is generally an act of war under international law, though Trump has limited this one to “sanctioned” tankers — that’s maybe 30-40% of Venezuela’s total oil export traffic, which already slowed after last week’s Skipper seizure. He’s ratcheting up the pressure on Maduro while
presumed exile talks
continue. Trump’s move also comes just as oil prices drop to their lowest in five years, cushioning the impact this semi-blockade might have at the pump. Meanwhile, word just emerged of another near-air-collision with a US military aircraft off Venezuela.
🇮🇩
INDONESIA
-
A mining mystery.
Jakarta is investigating reports that 15 Chinese nationals attacked Indonesian soldiers with machetes, an airsoft gun, and a taser, after the troops investigated why the group flew a drone over a nearby military training area. (
Antara
)
Comment:
The details are hazy, but a nearby gold mine is currently at the centre of an ownership dispute with China-based investors, who are in turn seemingly accusing Indonesia’s soldiers of engaging in illegal gold-mining!
🇦🇫
AFGHANISTAN
-
Tough winter.
The World Food Programme has warned that, for the first time in decades, it can’t offer adequate humanitarian aid for Afghanistan’s winter: drivers include mass deportations from neighbouring Iran and Pakistan, plus a 40% collapse in donor funding due to cuts out of the US and elsewhere. (
US News and Reports
)
Comment:
Another driver is the fact the Taliban seems better at fighting than governing.
🇪🇺
EUROPEAN UNION
-
I
❤
petrol cars.
The EU is watering down its ban on petrol and diesel cars from 2035, instead proposing the auto industry cut tailpipe emissions by 90%. (
Guardian
)
Comment
: It’s further confirmation that even in Europe, the economic increasingly trumps the environmental.
🇬🇷
GREECE
-
Debt free?
Colour us pleasantly surprised, but Greece has made an early $6.2B repayment on its eurozone bailout, aiming to save $1.9B in interest by 2040. (
Euronews
)
Comment:
How’d Greece pull this off? It’s trimmed spending, tackled tax evasion, and encouraged post-crisis growth above EU averages. That’s helped Greece regain access to cheaper investment-grade financing, barely years after markets offloaded it as junk.
🇸🇬
SINGAPORE
-
A hearing, please.
A court has dismissed the first challenge in 15 years to Singapore’s death penalty for drug traffickers, as it carries out the most executions since 2003. (
SCMP
)
🇨🇴
COLOMBIA
-
Bystander.
Authorities have blamed Colombia’s leftist-narco
National Liberation Army
(ELN) guerrillas for a roadside bomb that killed two police in Cali Tuesday. (
AP
)
Comment:
The ELN hasn’t claimed responsibility, but it did just
announce
a 72-hour “armed strike” in protest against Trump’s military buildup in the region. And yet the timing doesn’t quite match: the ELN re-launched its armed offensive the week before Trump even returned to office, so this is probably just new ELN spin for old ELN tactics
.
🇨🇩
DR CONGO
-
Our end of the deal.
The Rwanda-backed M23 rebel group active in eastern Congo has pledged to unilaterally withdraw from the key city of Uvira it just seized last week, following a request from irked US mediators. (
BBC
)
Comment:
It’s hard to know whether this reversal reflects US influence or M23 negotiation tactics to squeeze more Congolese concessions. Probably both.
Extra Intrigue
The Intrigue jobs board
💼
Data Scientist @
Schmidt Family Foundation
in the US
Deputy Group Corporate Secretary
@
Pictet
in Geneva
Associate Directorate, Political Science
@
Tec de Monterrey
in Mexico
Interim Community Marketing, Impact Coordinator
@
Patagonia
in Brunico
Flag of the day
Long
-time Intriguers will recall we examined this curious vexillological specimen years ago, but we just can’t get it out of our mind: how many hamstrings were pulled in the making of this flag? We think three.
Now, let’s give you some hints on the banner’s island home…
The above ‘trinacria’ shape represents the land’s three capes
Those three capes are called Pelorus, Passero, and Lilibeo, and…
The wheat-clad Medusa in the middle is an ode to the island’s fertility.
Any guesses?
Yep, it’s the flag of Sicily. And for colours, visuals, and sheer flexibility, it gets a cool 9.7/10.
Today’s poll
Do you share MI6's concerns around the tech broligarchy?
🚨 Yes, it's now a security issue
✖️ No, it's still subject to our laws
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think Pax Silica will work?
💽
Yes, they all want to diversify away from China (43%)
🔪
Nope, too many cooks in the kitchen (54%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (3%)
Your two cents:
🔪
M.S:
“Things rarely stay focused on one goal. There will be so many side projects and wrangling between ‘alignees’, consensus on core goals will be sacrificed for political leverage.”
💽
H:
“It’s got a chance because wariness of China’s long term goals may overcome stress and mutual suspicion amongst the players.”
✍️
J.B:
“US brokership isn't nearly as attractive (or effective) as it once was. Who can trust the Americans to keep their word in this day and age?”