URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/milei-wins-argentinas-presidency
Title: 🌍 Milei wins Argentina's presidency

Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Three very different names trended over the weekend, leaving me with three very different thoughts on our world.
The first is
Travis Head
, who helped Australia win the Men’s
Cricket World Cup
while ~2 billion folks watched live. For non-cricket fans (like me), it’s a reminder that the world’s attention isn’t always where we think.
The second name is
Javier Milei
, just elected Argentina’s (and maybe the world’s) first libertarian president. More on him below, though my thought here is that any status quo in our world now often seems only a maverick away from crumbling.
And the third is
Sam Altman
,
ousted
abruptly on Friday night from the AI powerhouse he co-founded (OpenAI). His departure has been bigger news than the
AI summit
of 28 governments earlier this month. And that probably says something about where AI’s centre of gravity sits right now.
- Jeremy Dicker, Managing Editor
Not a subscriber? Join here!
TODAY’S NEWS
Israel’s latest footage.
The Israeli military has released what it’s describing as footage of Hamas taking Israeli hostages inside Gaza’s Al-Shifa hospital (plus a fortified Hamas tunnel underneath). But global attention seems to be shifting to reports of an impending hostage deal between Israel and Hamas.
Microsoft taps former OpenAI CEO.
Just days after Sam Altman was suddenly ousted from his own startup’s board, his blindsided investor (Microsoft) has recruited him for another role. This rounds out what must be one of the most stunning tech firings in history.
Another ship taken.
Yemen’s Houthi forces say they’ve captured a cargo ship affiliated with an Israeli billionaire, but Israeli authorities say the Japanese-operated ship doesn’t have any links to Israel at all. Shipping ownership can get murky at times, and the relevant billionaire is declining to comment for now.
Zelensky fires chief military medic.
Ukraine’s president has confirmed the removal of Ukraine’s military medic chief, demanding “
a fundamentally new level of medical support for our soldiers
”. Rumours about the sacking had been swirling after reports about the poor quality of the army’s medical supplies surfaced.
Rosalynn Carter dies, aged 96.
Among many other tributes, the former US First Lady will be remembered as a passionate advocate for mental health.
TOP STORY
Outsider candidate Javier Milei has been elected Argentina’s next president
Populist outsider wins Argentina’s presidency
The populist-libertarian Javier Milei will be Argentina's next president from December 10th, after he trounced the ruling party's candidate yesterday (Sunday) by the largest margin since Argentina returned to democracy in 1983.
So Milei will soon take the helm of Argentina's $622B economy: it’s Latin America's third-largest, home to 46 million people, and with a seat at the G20.
Milei’s victory is pretty remarkable
. If you were to draw up a list of things a candidate in Argentina
shouldn't
do, Milei went ahead and did them anyway. He:
referred to the Pope (who hails from Argentina) as “
evil
”
re-opened old wounds from the country's dictatorship (1976-1983)
praised the late British leader Margaret Thatcher (reviled by many locally for her role in the UK-Argentina war of 1982), and
even mocked Argentina’s late soccer legend Maradona (though he drew the line at any criticism of present-day superstar, Lionel Messi).
And yet somehow, Milei still won. Why?
Three quick reasons:
First, voters were angry
at Argentina's ruling Peronists. Holding power for 16 of the past 20 years, the interventionist party now leaves behind a country with 40% poverty, 143% inflation, and $22B in debt payments due next year.
Second, Milei sought to smooth his edges
, apologising to the pope, walking back some proposals, winning endorsements from mainstream figures (including a former centre-right president), and dropping his chainsaw schtick at rallies.
And third, he connected with younger voters
, many of whom know only an Argentina in crisis (and who are active on Tiktok, where Milei has dominated).
In the end, many voters veered between anger at what the outgoing party leaves behind, and fear over
what Milei might do
next
(he’s vowed to slash spending and replace the peso with the US dollar, while also referring to leftists as “
shit
”).
Once he takes power next month, Milei looks set to be constrained by:
the sheer scale of the challenge he inherits
the sheer difficulty of his proposed solutions, and
his lack of a party machine across Argentina’s dispersed political system.
So with that in mind, it seems voters opted for a constrained Milei rather than continued, unrestrained Peronism.
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
One reason investors have long been wary of Argentina is a sense that the place just doesn’t change. So one way to look at Milei's victory is as a rebuke of that very idea: folks in Argentina have clearly voted for change here.
And that partly explains why business leaders, like the CEO of Argentina's largest firm, are
cheering
Milei's victory.
For world leaders, Argentina's vote for change will mean different things: Milei hasn't shied away from criticising others (including Argentina's top trading partners, China and Brazil), while pledging closer ties to the US, and even hinting at a softening in Argentina's territorial dispute with the UK.
But realistically, much will depend on how he translates rhetoric into reality. E.g., how do you even dollarise an economy that has no dollars? With voters clearly running low on patience, Milei doesn't have much time to deliver.
Also worth noting:
Argentina’s immediate neighbours (
Bolivia
,
Brazil
,
Chile
,
Paraguay
,
Uruguay
) have sent conciliatory messages for now. Further north, Colombia's left-leaning president
tweeted
that Milei’s victory was a "
sad day
" for Latin America.
Share the Intrigue
SUPPORTED BY MILLENNIUM SPACE SYSTEMS, A BOEING COMPANY
Small Satellites, Big Missions
Millennium Space Systems, a Boeing Company, is a small satellite prime, delivering high-performance constellation solutions for National Security Space.
Founded in 2001, the company's active production lines and 80% vertical integration enable the rapid delivery of small satellites across missions and orbits – LEO, MEO and GEO.
Learn more here.
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇨🇳
China
: Australia has accused China of “
unsafe and unprofessional conduct
” after a People’s Liberation Army-Navy ship deployed sonars
injuring several Australian navy divers
. The divers were reportedly untangling fishing nets from their ship’s engines in international waters.
🇩🇪
Germany
: Turkish President Erdoğan flew to Germany on Friday for a
rather low-key visit
. They had a lengthy agenda (migration, trade, Ukraine), but Berlin was careful not to draw attention to the visit given Erdoğan’s ongoing criticism of Israel, which Germany staunchly supports.
🇲🇻
Maldives
: Mohamed Muizzu, the newly-inaugurated president, has formally requested the
withdrawal of 70 Indian troops
stationed on the archipelago. Muizzu has sought closer ties to Beijing but promises the Indian forces won’t be replaced with Chinese personnel.
🇬🇹
Guatemala
: A prosecutor has moved to
strip president-elect Arevalo of his immunity
over claims he encouraged students to  occupy a key university. Critics say it’s an attempt by corrupt officials to prevent Arevalo (an anti-corruption figure) from taking power in January.
🇱🇷
Liberia
: Former football star and current Liberian President George Weah has
conceded defeat
after last week’s runoff elections. The 78-year-old winner and former vice president, Joseph Boakai, pledges to invest in infrastructure, tackle poverty, and crack down on corruption.
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Your weekly roundup of the world’s stranger news
In Dubai, golf champion Rory McIlroy found himself in an awkward situation after his ball landed
in the lap of a spectator
. Thankfully for all involved, the golfer didn’t have to play it as it lay.
Italy has
banned lab-grown meat
, with both supporters and opponents of the ban labelling each other as anti-Italian.
A Belgium-bound cargo plane has had to return to New York after a
horse escaped its stall
aboard the aircraft.
Canadian police have responded to reports of mysterious screams, only to find the culprit was
just a very sad goat
.
US astronauts carrying out routine maintenance on a space station have
lost their toolbag
(it’s now visible from Earth with binoculars).
And a ransomware gang
has reported its own victim
to US authorities after the target failed to promptly disclose it’d been hacked.
FLAG OF THE DAY
Antwerp, Belgium’s most populous province, rocks a flag so full of shapes and primary colours it’d make Piet Mondrian blush. The red, yellow, and blue represent three of the territory’s most famous cities (Antwerp, Mechelen, and Turnhout), while the chequered pattern pays homage to medieval Flemish rebels.
Our rating:
8.9/10
DAILY POLL
Do you think switching to the US dollar could help Argentina's economy?
👍 Yes, it's worth a try
🤔 No, the costs of such a shock would be too great
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Thursday’s poll:
Do you think deals with third-party countries are a good idea to manage migration?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
👍 Yes, global challenges require global responses (64%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️ 👎 No, the human cost is unacceptable (32%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!)  (4%)
Your two cents:
👍
G.G:
“It is the only viable solution for countries who are overwhelmed with a never ending stream of migrants.”
👎
G.M:
“As an Australian who has witnessed this type of ‘solution’ in action over many years - the suffering, loss of dignity and extreme mental health consequences are unacceptable. The third-party countries are often not appropriately resourced to manage the program, and current media reports are highlighting significant opportunities for corruption in the contracting process.”
Share the newsletter