URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/mining-massive-global-fault-line
Title: Mining is a massive global fault line

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
‘Goblin Mode’ won this year’s
Oxford Dictionary Word of the Year
in a landslide public vote. Oxford defines the phrase as “
a type of behaviour which is unapologetically self-indulgent, lazy, slovenly, or greedy, typically in a way that rejects social norms or expectations.
” Apparently, even
Stephen King
is a fan!
Today’s briefing is a ~5.0 min read:
⛏️
Mining battles:
Putting the critical in critical minerals.
➕ Plus:
Peru’s president stages a coup, Salvadorian troops surround a city, and Argentina’s most powerful politician might go to jail.
🎁 🍷
Don’t forget
we’re giving away 6 bottles of wine to help you ring in the holidays. Enter to win by referring us to your friends.
More referrals = more chances to win!*
📰 GLOBAL HEADLINES
Stories:
The Globe and Mail
,
The Times of India
,
Nation
,
The Star
,
Correio da Manha
🤿 DEEP DIVE
Mining is still contentious
In brief:
Critical minerals and rare earth metals are essential components in electric car batteries, smartphones, and defence technology.
But mining these materials can be environmentally destructive, morally contentious, and the source of intense geopolitical battles.
A lithium field in Chile’s Atacama Desert, a cobalt miner in the Congo, and an F-35 in flight. Credits: Paz Olivares Droguett/NPR; Junior Hannah/ AFP; Lockheed Martin.
Word to the wise
Rare earth metals and critical minerals are - to borrow a word - critical to the green energy transition.
According to the
International Energy Agency
, the average electric car requires more than 200 kilograms of critical minerals, six times that of a conventional combustion vehicle.
If policymakers pursue ambitious emissions reduction plans, there could be up to a six-fold increase in critical minerals demand by 2040.
That sort of swell in demand won’t be easy to meet.
Minerals like lithium, cobalt, and copper are geographically concentrated in a few countries, and mining for them can be politically divisive and environmentally destructive.
The big dig
Here are some mining challenges to keep an eye out for.
1.
🌎
Latin America - Political challenges
Lithium is a key component in the rechargeable lithium-ion batteries that power electric vehicles, smartphones, and solar panels.
And Latin America has a lot of it.
But political and environmental battles are discouraging the inflow of capital investment needed to develop mines across the region.
Chilean regulators have
levied hefty fines
against mining companies in the lithium-rich Atacama Desert for over-extracting groundwater.
Plus, activists argue that using the Atacama’s groundwater for lithium production
starves local communities
of much-needed water supplies.
2. 🇨🇩 DR Congo -
Human rights challenges
The Democratic Republic of the Congo produces 70% of the world’s cobalt, an extremely rare mineral which keeps lithium-ion batteries from catching fire.
But DR Congo is a war-torn country with poor labour laws
, and a large percentage of cobalt extraction is done by unregulated artisanal miners called
creuseurs
.
As reported by the
New Yorker
,
creuseurs
are often killed by mine cave-ins and experience violence and sexual abuse by local militants.
This poses an obvious ethical dilemma for Western companies that use Congo-based cobalt to power their green technologies.
3.
🇨🇳
China - Geopolitical challenges
The US-made F-35 bills itself as the most advanced fighter jet ever made and will be a corner stone of 'western' countries' defence plans in the coming decades.
The problem is, a single
F-35 uses 417 kilograms
of rare earth metals to power its targeting radar and electronic systems.
And about 60% of rare earth mining and 85% of its processing
occurs in China,
which gives it enormous leverage
over the US and Western allies:
In 2010, a fishing dispute led China to
ban all rare earth exports
to Japan.
Citing defence concerns, China tightened controls on rare earth
exports to the US
last year.
What’s next?
Governments and companies are rethinking their supply chains in response to these challenges but are facing challenges of their own:
Some environmentalists and indigenous groups
oppose mining in Nevada’s
lithium-rich desert.
Electric car companies’ cobalt-free batteries
have lower performance
.
And China will remain the world’s pre-eminent rare earth supplier for decades.
As trying as they may be,
these efforts to near-shore rare earth and critical mineral production will continue, with governments in free-market countries playing an increasingly important role in securing supplies.
❝
“This is a critical defence issue, like the shipyards in the Second World War. Rare earths lends itself to a state capitalist solution more than just about anything.”
David Hammond
, rare earths expert
🤝 TOGETHER WITH LEARNING BREW
The most universal language is numbers
In businesses all over the world, making and managing numbers in a P&L is one thing, but do you know how to use data to improve performance? Really well? Thanks to Morning Brew's Business Analytics Accelerator, you can do just that.
The 7-week virtual course will help you use data to make more informed decisions with only a 3-5 hour commitment per week. Maintain your 9-5 all while preparing for that next promotion.
Apply with code INTRIGUE and get $100 off.
Apply today.
🔦 REGIONAL SPOTLIGHT
The Americas
🇨🇦 Canada
Amnesty International’s Canadian office was
targeted by Beijing-backed hackers
, according to Canadian investigators.
The hack is the latest in a series of incidents that have damaged China-Canada relations.
🇸🇻 El Salvador
About 10,000 Salvadorian troops have
surrounded the city of Soyapango
(population: 290,000) in the latest effort to crack down on gangs.
Around 58,000 people have been arrested since President Nayib Bukele declared a state of emergency in March.
🇬🇾 Guyana
The US-based Hess Corporation has agreed to buy
$750M of carbon credits
from Guyana over the next decade in an effort to protect its rainforests.
Hess is a partner in the consortium developing Guyana’s Stabroek Block, one of the world’s largest oil and gas fields.
🇲🇽 Mexico
US officials are threatening to
initiate a trade war
if Mexico, America’s second-largest corn export partner, goes through with a ban on genetically modified corn.
US Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack travelled to Mexico last week to meet with President López Obrador to resolve the dispute.
🇵🇪 Peru
In a still-developing story, Peruvian President Pedro Castillo was impeached yesterday after
attempting to dissolve Congress
and rule by decree. Several news outlets reported that the (former) President was being held at a police station in Lima.
The chaos unfolding in Peru will reverberate through Latin America; a Pacific Alliance meeting set to be held in Peru next week
has already been postponed
.
🗞 IN OTHER NEWS...
Argentina’s vice president is sentenced to jail
Time will tell if Cristina Fernández de Kirchner’s story ends the same way 'Seinfeld' did.
The news:
Argentina’s Vice President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner was
sentenced to six years in prison
after a three-year corruption trial concluded on Tuesday.
The three-judge panel also barred Kirchner and several aides from holding public office.
The crime:
Ms Kirchner was standing trial for awarding public contracts to close business associates.
Almost half of the contracts - for roads in Patagonia - were never finished and cost the Argentine government more than $1B.
Kind of a big deal:
Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner isn’t your average politician: she was Argentina’s first lady from 2003-2007, its President from 2007-2015, and its Vice President since 2019.
Not everyone loves Kirchner. In September, she was nearly killed during an
assassination attempt
in Buenos Aires.
Still, her left-wing populist
Kirchnerismo
movement is among the most popular political ideologies in the country.
And Kirchner’s trial was a dividing line in Latin American politics.
In August, Kirchner’s left-wing allies in Bolivia, Colombia and Mexico
accused prosecutors
of trying to
“bury the values and ideals [Kirchner] represents, with the ultimate goal of implementing a neoliberal model.”
It’s (not) over:
Kirchner will continue serving as Vice President while her case is being appealed.
But without plans to continue holding public office, Kirchner’s 30-year political career looks set to end, one way or another, when her term ends next year.
🤔 WE'RE INTRIGUED BY...
Earlier this year, Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan asked the UN to
refer to his country by a name
many might not recognise: Türkiye (pronounced: tour-key-yeh)
.
A country changing its name isn't as uncommon as you might think
, particularly when names have colonial overtones:
Namibia
supplanted “South West Africa.”
Calling
Cambodia
“Kampuchea” feels like a relic of the past.
And unless you’re
Elaine’s boss J Peterman on a spiritual journey
(can you tell we’ve been rewatching Seinfeld?), you most likely use the name Myanmar, not “Burma”.
In a move we’ll definitely use as a trivia question in the future,
the Netherlands
officially
dropped all mention of “Holland” from its name
in 2020.
As for
North Macedonia,
a geopolitical spat forced that name change. Greece accused its northern neighbour of using “Macedonia” to
appropriate the legacy of Alexander the Great
, and vetoed NATO and EU accession talks with the former Yugoslav state until the change was made in 2019.
✏️ Note:
there is some controversy around Erdoğan’s rebranding plans, with critics accusing him of using the name change to distract from domestic issues ahead of next year’s election. Primarily for that reason, we’ll continue to follow the lead of most major media outlets and refer to the country as ‘Turkey'.
*Eligible for US-based subscribers only. Panoramic Wines sadly do not ship to the following states: AL, AK, HI, IL, KS, MI, MS, NH, ND, OK, TN, UT, WS. But if you
do
live in these states - you can always ship it to a friend for a holiday surprise!
The giveaway closes on 14 December!