URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/mongolias-prime-minister-lands-us
Title: 🌍 Mongolia's prime minister lands in the US

Today’s newsletter supported by:
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
In this captivating world of ours, we’re constantly hammering out sentences we never thought we’d type. Like this one: Kenya has suspended the local activities of
Worldcoin
, a biometric cryptocurrency startup offering free tokens to folks who agree to have their eyeballs scanned.
Today’s briefing is a 4 min read:
✈️
Mongolia
’s prime minister heads to
the
US
.
🇹🇷
Turkey
racks up yet another drone sale.
➕
Plus:
Heavy rains in Beijing, how papers around the world are covering Donald Trump’s latest indictment, and when it’s easier to buy Coke than water.
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇹🇲
Turkmenistan
: Turkmenistan Airlines will
no longer fly
directly to Moscow, citing a series of recent drone attacks on Russia’s capital. Flights will instead go to Kazan, around 800km east of Moscow.
🇵🇱
Poland
: The Polish defence ministry will move more troops to the eastern border after locals there photographed two Belarussian helicopters
violating Polish airspace
on Tuesday (1 August). Belarussian officials have denied any incursion into Polish territory.
🇧🇩
Bangladesh
: The exiled leader of the opposition Bangladesh Nationalist Party was sentenced in absentia yesterday (Wednesday) to
nine years in prison
on graft charges. The decision triggered protests from opposition supporters who called the trial politically motivated.
🇨🇦
Canada
: Meta has
started restricting news
content appearing on Facebook and Instagram in Canada, after a new law there required social media platforms to compensate news outlets for such content. Canada’s new law is similar to a 2021 law in Australia which led to tech firms paying news outlets in the country.
🇸🇳
Senegal
: Authorities
suspended the use of TikTok
yesterday (Wednesday), days after dissolving the country's main opposition party and detaining its leader. In a statement, the communications minister wrote that TikTok
“is the social network favoured by people with bad intentions”.
✈️
Mongolia | Geopolitics
US VP Kamala Harris and Mongolian PM Oyun-Erdene Luvsannamsrai
Mongolia’s prime minister lands in the US
Mongolian leader Oyun-Erdene Luvsannamsrai is in the US this week for
talks with Vice President Kamala Harris
and other senior US officials.
Why?
Mongolia wants to
:
☟ Reduce its dependence on neighbouring China and Russia
⚒️ Diversify its resource-heavy economy
🤝
Lower its inherent isolation as a landlocked nation, plus
📸
The photo ops play well ahead of Mongolia’s 2024 elections.
As for the US, it wants to:
🎲
Dilute the influence of Beijing and Moscow on Mongolia’s choices
🌏 Nudge Mongolia towards Western efforts at balancing China
⛏️ Tap Mongolia’s vast critical mineral reserves for the US tech, energy, and defence sectors, and
💪
Reduce China’s dominance in those same mineral supply chains.
So how do they try to achieve all this?
The two countries have:
🛫
Finalised an
Open Skies
pact to facilitate direct air travel
📈
Worked on a ‘third neighbour’ economic plan (per Mongolia’s policy of finding partners to balance its two neighbours), and
✍️ Signed a
critical minerals deal
back in June.
Intrigue's take:
These kinds of deals open a door, but ultimately it’s still up to each person and business whether they want to head on through. That’s why Mongolia is chatting in more detail with key players like
Google
,
SpaceX
, and others.
But even with the door open, and leaders cheering folks on, there’s such a strong gravitational pull in other directions: both countries naturally trade the most with their own two immediate neighbours.
So a lot in this visit probably still comes down to signalling (particularly to China and Russia) that both the US and Mongolia have options.
Also worth noting:
US-Mongolia trade in goods was
~$175 million
last year. China-Mongolia trade was
$13.7B
(64% of Mongolia’s total trade).
Mongolia has abstained from UN resolutions condemning neighbouring Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.
After Mongolia welcomed a visit by the Dalai Lama in 2016, Beijing
raised fees
on Mongolian products and restricted an important border crossing.
📰
How newspapers covered…
The indictment of former US President Donald Trump
London, UK
“Donald Trump indicted for ‘unprecedented’ attempt to overturn US election”
Singapore
“Why Trump is still front runner for Republican presidential nomination, even after latest indictment”
Beijing, China
“Trump indicted with high support rate as US democracy accelerates decadence”
Today’s newsletter is supported by: CookUnity
Intrigue Team Member Runs on Cook Unity
Intrigue’s Growth and Operations guru Aine swears by CookUnity - a platform where chefs in your area cook premium meals with high-quality ingredients. Best of all, they’re delivered to your door.
Save yourself time and hassle, without sacrificing flavor or quality.
Start today.
🇹🇷
Turkey | Defence & security
Turkey’s TB2 drone has been called the ‘Toyota Corolla of drones’
Turkey’s defence industry is booming
Indonesia
has announced
it’ll purchase 12 Turkish-made ANKA drones for $300M, with the first shipment expected to arrive in November 2025.
Drones
have become some of Turkey’s highest-profile exports. Just in the last month:
🇰🇼
Kuwait
purchased $367M of
TB2
drones from the firm Baykar
🇽🇰
Kosovo
also bought an undisclosed number of
TB2s
, and
🇸🇦
Saudi Arabia
sealed Turkey’s largest ever defence export deal, buying ~$1B worth of Baykar’s newer
Akinci
drones.
Plus, there are another 30 countries that own and operate Turkish drones, which have appeared on battlefields around Libya, Azerbaijan, Syria, Ukraine and beyond.
Intrigue’s take:
You can see why Turkey’s drones are popular - they’re durable, effective, and cheap. Hence their reputation as the ‘
Toyota Corolla of drones
’.
And Turkey itself benefits, too: it needs the export revenue, plus having nations dependent on it for defence kit gives Ankara leverage.
Also worth noting:
Foreign sales accounted for
90% of Baykar’s revenues
in 2022.
Baykar’s
chair and chief technology officer
is married to Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan’s daughter.
➕
Extra Intrigue
What we’re reading and watching about
water security
.
When it’s ‘easier to buy Coke than water’
The quest for new water sources
Desertification is an existential challenge for Iran
China and India might be most at-risk of water shortages
🗳️ Poll time!
Do you think social media companies should pay publications for the articles that appear on their platforms?
💵 Yes, it seems only fair
🙅 No, the exposure and traffic should be enough
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
📸
Photo of the day
Typhoon Doksuri hit Beijing hard, causing flooding and heavy rains. Credits: Reuters
Beijing recorded its heaviest rainfall in 70 years this week as tropical storm Doksuri hit China’s northeastern coast. More than 120,000 people were evacuated from 13 districts across the capital.
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think the US should open more nuclear reactors?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🔋
Yes, they're a reliable source of energy (47%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️
💚
Yes, they're a green source of energy (34%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
💸
No, they're too costly  (5%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
💀
No, they're too dangerous (11%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!) (3%)
Your two cents
:
🔋
B.F.C:
“The nuclear power industry has a major marketing problem. The average person hears 'nuclear' and thinks of Chernobyl and Homer Simpson, not a clean, reliable energy source.”
💀
M.H.M
: “The US has not yet determined how to handle spent radioactive waste. There is no point in creating more until we decide how to manage the current waste.”
💚
C.O:
“It's well past time to revisit thorium-based fission. Meltdown free and difficult to weaponize.”