URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/mutiny-russia
Title: 🌍 Mutiny in Russia

Today’s newsletter supported by:
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Greetings to those who’ve been smashing that ‘refresh’ button all weekend like it’s a piñata. We feel you.
Today’s briefing is a 4 min read:
🇷🇺
What’s coming next for
Russia
.
🇪🇺
The
EU
looks to GMO for climate adaptation.
➕
Plus:
Remittances around the world, how the papers are covering a defiant Russian diplomat in Australia, and the future is finally here (in the form of jetpack-delivered pizza).
P.S.
We only need 150 more folks to share the Intrigue with a friend before we release our special edition,
How the World is Changing.
Use your unique referral link below!
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇦🇿
Azerbaijan
: The foreign ministers of Azerbaijan and Armenia will
meet in Washington this week
to negotiate a settlement over the contested region of Nagorno-Karabakh. Azerbaijan currently controls the region, which is home to 120,000 ethnic Armenians.
🇩🇰
Denmark
: Prosecutors have
approved the extradition
to India of a Danish citizen accused of smugglings arms to an Indian revolutionary group in 1995. He has admitted to dropping rocket launchers and missiles from a cargo plane in eastern India.
🇦🇺
Australia
: A presumed Russian diplomat, squatting for days at the prospective site of Russia’s new embassy in Canberra,
has left
the property after Australia’s highest court ruled against Moscow. Australian lawmakers blocked Russian development of the site earlier this month over concerns it was too close to parliament.
🇧🇿
Belize
: The World Health Organisation has declared Belize as only the fourth country in the Americas (after El Salvador, Paraguay, and Argentina) to
eradicate malaria
.
🇿🇲
Zambia
: The International Monetary Fund has approved a plan from Zambia’s foreign creditors to
restructure $6.3B in debt
. China, which is owed $4.1B of that debt, also agreed to the plan.
🇷🇺
Russia | Politics
President Putin (L) and his former confidant, Wagner chief Prigozhin (R)
Putin is under pressure at home
The hostile union between the Wagner mercenary group and Moscow finally ruptured over the weekend.
✊
After refusing to integrate with the military
, Wagner chief Prigozhin then
rejected
the entire basis for Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, and marched to within 200km of Moscow. He only pulled his troops back when President Putin agreed to a deal, after publicly
labelling
Prigozhin a traitor.
🙍‍♂️ So what does this all mean for Putin?
After reportedly retreating to his Valdai bunker and offering major concessions for Prigozhin to back off (new military heads, safety guarantees), Putin’s illusion of invincibility is now gone.
🇷🇺
What does this mean for Russia?
Having allowed a warlord to march 800km towards Moscow, and losing valuable military aircraft in the process, whatever remained of Russia’s illusion of invulnerability is now gone, too.
🇺🇦
And what does this all mean for Ukraine?
It could now capitalise, as:
Russia’s key decision-makers become consumed by the turmoil
Russian troops take fewer risks while they await new direction
Russian morale on the frontlines plunges even lower, and
Putin further loses the ability to rally the country behind his war.
Intrigue's take:
So, dear Intriguers, we hear you asking what’ll happen next?
Well, there’s now a growing list of Russian factions (across the oligarchs, securo-crats and organised crime) that would be better off without Putin.
There’s also a history of Russian losses abroad accelerating regime collapse at home: think 1905, 1917 and 1989. And systemic cracks there often just get wider: think Gorbachev surviving a 1991 coup, only to be gone months later.
So, one way or another, there’s a chance Putin doesn’t make it to Christmas. It’s hard to see how Prigozhin survives this either.
Also worth noting:
Wagner fighters
reportedly
sent farewells to their families and told them to watch the news the day before their march on Moscow.
The Kremlin
says
Prigozhin agreed to leave Russia for neighbouring Belarus in a deal brokered by Belarusian President Lukashenko. Prigozhin’s whereabouts are currently unknown.
Following
initial reports
that Russian Defence Minister Shoigu was under house arrest, Moscow just released
footage
purporting to show him visiting a command centre in Ukraine.
📰
How newspapers covered…
A lone Russian diplomat squatting on a vacant lot in Canberra
Bonn, Germany
Australia: Russian diplomat squats on site of canned embassy
Petaling Jaya, Malaysia
Squatting Russian diplomat on site of proposed embassy sparks standoff in Australia
Atlanta, US
Australian leader dismisses alleged Russian diplomat squatter as just ‘some bloke,’ not a security threat
Today’s newsletter is supported by: instacart
Unlimited Free Grocery Delivery on Orders $35+
Get groceries delivered in as fast as one hour.
Start your two-week free trial today!
🇪🇺
EU
| Climate adaptation
The EU may be rethinking its approach to GMO
The EU is
reportedly
looking to relax its rules on genetically modified (GMO) crops, with a view to its farmers growing more climate-resistant produce.
Last year saw record temperatures across Europe
;
the mercury there is rising twice as fast as the global average, posing a risk to the continent’s vast agricultural sector.
If the Europeans do end up embracing GMO,
they’ll join major exporters like
the US, Brazil and Argentina
that’ve been banking on
GMO for decades.
Intrigue’s take:
This all makes sense in a vacuum, but Brussels is the opposite of a vacuum: it’s an absolute whirlwind of agricultural, environmental, industrial, legal, and pro-consumer forces. And next year’s EU parliamentary elections will only see that whirlwind spin harder.
Also worth noting:
The EU enacted its current GMO regulations in 2001 in response to public debate around GMO’s safety and environmental impacts.
A 2020 Pew Survey covering 20 countries found around half of respondents
believed GMOs to be unsafe
.
🎧 Today on
Intrigue Outloud
AP
How long does Putin have left?
Find out here!
➕
Extra Intrigue
Your weekly palette cleanser of slightly ridiculous global news.
Billionaires Elon Musk and Mark Zuckerberg have agreed (we can’t believe we’re typing this) to
face off in a cage fight
.
Two New York lawyers were sanctioned for
citing fake Chat-GPT generated cases
in a legal brief.
A man in India checked-in to a five-star hotel for one night, and ended up
remaining for another
600 nights
without paying a cent.
A mayor in Mexico has received backlash after
hiring lap dancers for a Father’s Day celebration
.
A Belgian TikToker has
faked his own death
to see who would show up at his funeral.
Domino’s latest publicity stunt includes a
pizza delivered by jetpack
.
🗳️ Poll time!
Do you see Putin still in power by the end of the year?
👑 Yes, despite recent turmoil, he's too deeply entrenched
🙅‍♂️ No, one way or another, he'll be gone before Christmas
🖋️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
📊
Chart of the day
Credits: Statista.
Like many other economic indicators, remittances are making a comeback, with global flows hitting $647B last year, up from $599B the year prior. India has been the top beneficiary since 2008.
Thursday’s poll:
If you could have dinner with any sitting world leader, who would you choose and why?
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇺🇸
Joe Biden (11%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇨🇳
Xi Jinping (12%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇫🇷
Emmanuel Macron (8%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇸🇦
Mohammed Bin Salman (7%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🇺🇦
Volodymyr Zelensky  (35%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇹🇼
Tsai Ing-wen (4%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇧🇷
Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva (7%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇮🇳
Narendra Modi  (5%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇮🇩
Joko Widodo (2%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!) (9%)
Your two cents
:
🇫🇷
D.K:
“He might have an inside track to some tickets for the Tour de France.”
✍️
M.D:
“Taylor Swift”
Additional suggestions:
🇸🇻
Nayib Bukele,
🇨🇦
Justin Trudeau,
🇷🇺
Vladimir Putin,
🇮🇪
Michael Higgins,
🇵🇬
James Marape and
🇸🇬
Lee Hsien Loong.