URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/nato-looks-towards-asia
Title: 🌍 NATO looks towards Asia

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Diplomatic immunity sounds epic, right? Like the bad guy from
Lethal Weapon 2
. In reality, it mostly leads to huge unpaid parking fines (
$15.7M
in NYC alone). But every now and then, a diplomat steps it up (or down) a notch. Like
this guy
, who
ran a raging illegal casino
in his consulate.
Today’s briefing is a 4.1 min read:
🎖️
NATO
to open its first office in Asia.
🕵️
Spies
might be monitoring Qatar’s submarine programme.
➕
Plus:
We nearly met Joe Biden, how the papers are covering China’s new conscription laws, and the world celebrates Press Freedom Day.
🗺️ AROUND THE WORLD
🇭🇰
Hong Kong
: Only 19% of representatives on Hong Kong’s local district councils will
continue to be elected directly
, according to reforms announced on Tuesday. That’s down from around 90% currently.
🇧🇾
Belarus
: A court sentenced journalist Raman
Pratasevich to prison
yesterday (Wednesday) on charges of organising unrest. Belarus arrested him in 2021 after forcing his RyanAir flight to divert to Minsk.
🇺🇸
United States
: Washington will soon deploy
1,500 soldiers to the US border
with Mexico. Officials expect migrant arrivals to double when a pandemic-era law, authorising the expulsion of undocumented migrants on health grounds, expires next week.
🇰🇪
Kenya
: Anti-government protests in Kenya
have resumed
this week after opposition leader Raila Odinga initially agreed to suspend them last month. Grievances include the high cost of food, fuel and electricity.
🇲🇲
Myanmar
: The ruling junta pardoned more than
2,000 political prisoners
yesterday (Wednesday) as a humanitarian gesture. The last time it released so many prisoners at once was in July 2021.
🎖️
NATO | GEOPOLITICS
NATO is planning to open a liaison office in Japan
NATO is opening its first office in Asia
Briefly:
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) will
open a liaison office in Japan
, boosting contact with its four ‘partners’ in the region (Australia, Japan, South Korea and New Zealand). It’ll be NATO’s first office in Asia.
The Western military alliance has been around for 74 years and has plenty of liaison offices already. This latest office,
containing
one official
, won’t open until next year (photocopiers can be a real pain to install).
So what’s the big deal?
NATO’s critics
(like Russia, China and North Korea) say NATO:
is reaching its “
tentacles
” into Asia
is raising the risk of confrontation, and
should just stick to its own turf (NATO’s eastern-most member is Turkey, located almost exactly on the opposite side of the world)
For its part, NATO
says
the new office:
continues decades of cooperation with its four partners in Asia
reciprocates those partners’ appointments of reps to NATO, and
reflects today’s reality that “
security is global. What happens in Europe matters for Asia
” (and vice versa).
Intrigue’s take:
Want to get a sense of how quickly history is moving? Look at NATO’s ‘
Strategic Concepts
’ (basically its evolving strategy) over the years:
NATO started out as a bulwark against communism in post-WWII Europe
Then after the Cold War, it focused more on challenges like terrorism
In 2010 it didn’t even mention China, and wanted a “partner” in Russia
Then in 2022, NATO said China’s “coercive policies” and “opaque military build-up” made it a top security challenge, while post-invasion Russia was now a “direct threat”
The times, they are a changin’.
Also worth noting:
NATO’s
Article 5
commits its members to defend one another against attack. It’s been invoked once, after the 2001 terrorist attacks on the US.
According to NATO’s
Article 10
, only
European countries
are eligible to become members.
📰
GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES
How different newspapers covered
: China’s revised conscription laws.
Links
:
Taiwan News
,
The Guardian
,
TVP World
.
Today’s briefing is sponsored by
World Politics Review
Special offer—get 3 months of World Politics Review for just $1!
WPR provides in-depth news and expert analysis on global affairs. Our expert contributors examine only what’s most important and tell you why.
We don’t just report the news, we analyze it, so you can find the signal in the noise.
WPR covers the entire world, including the key countries and regions everyone else is ignoring, and helps you understand how individual developments fit into larger global trends. We deliver to you only what’s important, so you get superior insight in less time.
Get three months now for just $1.
🕵️
QATAR | ESPIONAGE
Israel, India and Qatar are caught in a blurry web of espionage allegations.
Qatar accuses Indian nationals of spying for Israel
Briefly:
Eight veterans of the Indian Navy are
due to stand trial in Qatar
on charges they spied for Israel. The men were arrested last year and could face the death penalty if convicted.
The accused
were employed by an Indian technology and consulting firm helping Doha develop submarines designed to evade radar detection. Both Israel and India would theoretically have an interest in hampering Qatar’s navy:
🇮🇱
Israel wants to retain its US-backed military edge in the region (especially since Qatar is aligned with Iran, its top adversary), and
🇮🇳
India is wary of Qatar’s military partnership with Pakistan (India’s own top adversary).
Intrigue’s take:
Submarines, so hot right now. Their stealth, mobility, and element of surprise render them a hot item for militaries everywhere. So it’s no shock that counter-intelligence operatives everywhere are on high alert, too.
Also worth noting:
Last year, a US court sentenced a US naval engineer and his wife to prison for
attempting to sell submarine secrets to Brazil
.
India says Qatar hasn’t yet revealed the charges against its nationals. India’s opposition has accused Prime Minister Narendra Modi of
failing to lobby
for their release.
👀
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Here’s what we’re reading about the
evolving media landscape
after World Press Freedom Day yesterday (Wednesday).
Digital media’s original sin
For news about the podcasting world,
we read Podcast Review
: a newsletter bringing you the week’s best podcast episodes. Enjoyed by 10,000+ subscribers, including staff from NPR & The New Yorker.
The exhausted majority is demanding positive journalism
Journalists should treat AI as an existential threat
Threats against reporters are growing
📸
PHOTO OF THE DAY
Our wonderful co-founder Helen at this year’s White House Correspondents’ Dinner
That’s right! Intrigue attended Saturday’s annual White House Correspondents’ Dinner along with 2000+ VIPs like POTUS (whose
remarks
were amusingly self-deprecating).
Comedian Roy Wood Jr
headlined
the event, which also included cameos from
Arnie
and our very own co-founder,
Helen ‘nodding audience member’ Zhang
(yes, that’s a blurry Helen nodding in the video background
😁
).
🗳️ POLL TIME!
What do you think NATO's new office in Asia means?
🤷 Nothing, it's an office
🔥 It's a step towards triggering conflict in Asia
🙅 It's a step towards deterring conflict in Asia
🖋️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
If you could live comfortably in any city in the world, which city would you choose?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🇬🇧
London (22%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇨🇳
Shanghai (0.5%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇦🇪
Dubai (3%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇫🇷
Paris (13%)
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇯🇵
Tokyo (9%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇧🇷
Rio De Janeiro (4%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇺🇸
New York (12%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️
🇦🇺
Sydney  (16%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!) (21%)
Your two cents:
✍️
O.G:
“Why would I leave the farm?”
Honourable mentions from our readers include:
Barcelona, Yerevan, Ho Chi Minh City, Edinburgh, Montevideo and so many more!