URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/neutralitys-back-style
Title: Neutrality’s back in style

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
‘Tis the season to give back! We want to thank you, dear readers, for your continued support of International Intrigue. One of you can win up to six bottles of wine from our friends at
Panoramic Wines
. To enter the competition, all you have to do is refer your friends to the newsletter. Every new referral is an additional entry to the giveaway! Check out more information in the referral hub below.
Today’s briefing is a ~4.5 min read:
🏳️
Non-Alignment
: Past and present.
➕ Plus:
China relaxes its Covid restrictions, the Pakistani Taliban order more terror attacks, and Biden’s (not so) willing to talk to Putin.
📰 GLOBAL HEADLINES
Stories:
La República
,
Fiji Sun
,
Daily Sabah
,
Nigerian Tribune
,
Korea Times
🤿 DEEP DIVE
Neutrality’s back in style!
In brief:
The principles behind the 'Non-Alignment Movement', established during the Cold War, are coming back into vogue due to accelerating geopolitical polarisation.
India, Turkey, and Indonesia are three insightful examples of how countries are executing foreign policies that balance the interests of the US, China, and Russia.
Geopolitics, Taylor Swift style.
Leave me out of it
While we tend to leave forecasts to professionals like investment bankers or carnival fortunetellers, we’re certain one geopolitical trend from the 60s is due for a comeback.
Big tech offers a hint: Google searches for the term ‘non-aligned movement’
spiked between February and May
this year, reaching their highest peak in a decade.
Some context
: Established in 1961, the Non-Alignment Movement (NAM) is a forum of 120 countries that do not wish to be pulled into a big power games.
While its relevance declined after the end of the Cold War, the movement - or its core principles - is currently enjoying a resurgence.
As the geopolitical rivalry between the US and China (and Russia) intensifies, many nations are choosing to stay out of the swirl - if they can help it.
Get with the movement
The following three countries have all pledged to pursue an independent foreign policy.
1.
🇮🇳
India
As a member of the US-led 'Quad' alliance and BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa), India has been spread its allegiances across geopolitical groupings.
Currently, it enjoys a wary but cordial relationship with China, a friendship with the US, and warming economic ties with Russia - particularly when it comes to weapons and cheap oil.
Indian Foreign Minister
Subrahmanyam Jaishankar
doesn’t mince words
:
❝
“quite honestly, we have seen that the India-Russia relationship has worked to our advantage [...] So, if it works to my advantage, I would like to keep that going."
2.
🇮🇩
Indonesia
According to
Ben Bland
, nobody does neutrality quite like Indonesia. The country demonstrated this as this year's G20 Chair:
❝
“As G20 president, Indonesia has shown a desire to find the slim common ground between competing, even warring, nations. [...] That is a valuable service to the world in these fractious times.”
Ben Bland, Director of Chatham’s House Asia-Pacific Program
While Indonesia’s non-commitment might keep its allies on their toes, Jakarta could become a key balancing force between the US and China's regional rivalry.
3.
🇹🇷
Turkey
Interestingly, Turkey is not a NAM cardholder, but its foreign policy over the past few years has been everything but aligned.
As a NATO member, Turkey enjoys close defence ties with the West. But instead of imposing sanctions on Russia after the invasion of Ukraine, Turkey
nearly doubled
its trade volume with Russia since February.
What’s next?
One thing is certain: the world has no appetite for a big power showdown.
According to opinion polls by the Central European Institute of Asian Studies, people across
Asia
,
Latin America, and Africa
don’t feel the
need
to choose between China and the US.
This may be why the Non-Alignment Movement is here to stay, and might even be good news for us all.
🤝 SPONSORED BY THE NEWSETTE
News from beauty to business and beyond
The Newsette curates news and culture so you don't have to.
From world news to TikTok trends, there’s a lot of information you want to know. The Newsette packages all the info you want to know into a daily newsletter that will leave you informed and inspired.
Subscribe for free.
🔦 REGIONAL SPOTLIGHT
North & Central Asia
🇨🇳 China
China may be
shifting away from its strict Covid-zero
policy, with authorities easing lockdowns in Shanghai and Guangzhou despite rising cases.
The shift follows protests around the country that criticised the government’s pandemic response.
🇯🇵 Japan
The first trans-Arctic
undersea cable linking Japan to Europe
via North America has secured its first investment.
An earlier iteration of the project involving Russia was scrapped last year due to Russia's reluctance to lay cables in its territorial waters.
🇵🇰 Pakistan
The Pakistani Taliban have
broken its June ceasefire
with the Pakistani government, and called for fighters to carry out attacks.
The announcement may have been strategically timed as Pakistan just selected a new military chief.
🇹🇼 Taiwan
Last week, Taiwan
welcomed a delegation of UK lawmakers
seeking to promote Britain’s economic and political interests in the Indo-Pacific.
China responded by labelling the visit a “gross interference” in its internal affairs.
🇹🇯 Tajikistan
Tajikistan is
stepping up its military cooperation with China
by agreeing to conduct joint anti-terrorism exercises once every two years.
Security ties between the two countries have deepened since 2016, when unconfirmed reports emerged of a secret Chinese military facility in eastern Tajikistan.
🗞 IN OTHER NEWS...
Time to get down to business?
The news:
US President Joe Biden has announced he’d be willing to
sit down with Russian President Vladimir Putin
to discuss the ongoing Russo-Ukraine War.
The remarks are the farthest Biden has gone in suggesting openness to a diplomatic dialogue with Putin.
The conditions:
The hypothetical talks will first have to be approved by America’s NATO allies, and would only occur if Russia demonstrates a sincere willingness to end the war.
Since the latter doesn’t seem to be on the cards, we suggest you don’t hold your breath for a save-the-date.
There’s a French twist:
Biden’s remarks came during French President Emmanuel Macron’s US visit, where the two leaders sought to portray a united front vis-a-vis the war.
According to
New York Times
journalists Roger Cohen and Zolan Kanno-Youngs, Biden’s comments had an audience of one, but maybe not the one you’re thinking:
❝
“Mr. Biden’s public expression of conditioned willingness to reach out to Mr. Putin gratified French officials and provided unexpected support for President Emmanuel Macron’s outreach.”
Your move, Russia:
For its part, the Kremlin is demanding that the US recognises the four recently-annexed territories as a prerequisite to any negotiated peace. This is a definite no-go for Ukraine and its Western allies.
And so, we’re back to square one.
🤏 STORIES WE ALMOST COVERED
What should we have covered?
Tell us, and we'll cover it next week!
🇨🇦 Canada’s new Indo-Pacific strategy
🇹🇷 Turkey is mulling another military offensive in northern Syria
🇨🇳 Qatar and China sign one of the biggest LNG deals ever
🇿🇦 South Africa’s President is hanging on by a buffalo hair
🏴󠁧󠁢󠁳󠁣󠁴󠁿The UK Supreme Court rejects plans for a second Scottish independence vote
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
*Eligible for US-based subscribers only. Panoramic Wines sadly do not ship to the following states: AL, AK, HI, IL, KS, MI, MS, NH, ND, OK, TN, UT, WS. But if you
do
live in these states - you can always ship it to a friend for a holiday surprise!
The giveaway closes on 14 December!