URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/new-post-fa2d
Title: 🌍 Orders to Leave

IN TODAY’S EDITION
1️⃣ Why are Canada and India fighting again?
2️⃣ Why Algerians are googling ‘Renault 4’
3️⃣ Photo of the day
Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Is it just me, or is it impossible to ponder the delicate topic of diplomatic immunity without getting immediate flashbacks from
Lethal Weapon 2
?
You know the one, with that consul-general in Los Angeles somehow smuggling a few hundred million dollars of coke, and when anyone asks what’s up, he just growls “
dip-loh-matic imuuunity
” in that memorable South African accent.
In practice, diplomatic immunity is
much
more mundane. I promise. It’s mostly about a few countries not paying their parking fines, or the Russian ambassador importing industrial quantities of tax-free vodka ‘for personal use’, then offloading it on the local black market because that new dacha back home isn’t going to pay for itself.
Anyway, today’s story gets us as close to real-world
Lethal Weapon 2
vibes as you’ll ever see, with Canada alleging (and India denying) that senior
Indian diplomats were involved in some serious criminal activity on Canadian soil
.
PS -
¿Hablas español?
¡Check out our
weekly edition in Spanish
!
THE HEADLINES
US tells Israel to boost aid to Gaza or face military cuts.
In a letter sent Sunday, US Secretary of State Blinken and Secretary of Defense Austin have called on Israel to
increase aid
into and across Gaza (particularly the north) within 30 days, or risk cuts to US military assistance. The letter amounts to the strongest written warning from the US to its ally since the Hamas attacks last year.
ASML shares plunge on fears of weak chip demand.
The shares of Dutch advanced chip-machine maker ASML
dropped by 16%
yesterday (Tuesday) after it accidentally published its Q3 results a day early. Net bookings for September were well below expectations, though net sales remained high. “
It now appears the recovery is more gradual than previously expected
”, CEO Christophe Fouquet wrote. ASML is currently grappling with US and Dutch limits on tech exports to China.
US, Japan, and Korea unveil taskforce to monitor North Korea.
The new joint team will monitor the enforcement of
UN sanctions against North Korea
, after Russia rejected (and China abstained on) the renewal of a related panel of experts. Meanwhile, Ukrainian President Zelensky has now re-upped reports about North Korean
troops being sent to the frontline
to help Russia’s invasion.
Air India flight lands in Singapore after bomb threat.
Singapore has mobilised two fighter jets to escort an Air India flight to safety after the airline received an email stating there was a
bomb on board
. This is the third such bomb threat made against the company in recent days.
TOP STORY
India and Canada expel diplomats over extraordinary allegations
(L-R) The late Hardeep Singh Nijjar, Justin Trudeau, and Narendra Modi
Canada and India are at it again, with Canada expelling India’s high commissioner (ambassador) and five other diplomats over some truly extraordinary accusations: “
orchestrating homicides and extortion
” against Sikhs in Canada.
For its part, India denies any wrongdoing, and even denies its diplomats were expelled (rather, it
claims
it withdrew them for their own safety). So
India has now retaliated
,
booting
six Canadian diplomats in return. Those Canucks now have until Saturday, leaving barely enough time to throw back some final mango lassis before skipping town.
Didn’t India and Canada already have this argument last year?
Kinda, but here’s some quick context before we get to why this is escalating yet again.
As British rule receded in India, some members of the
Sikh
faith started calling for an independent homeland called Khalistan. And that morphed into an armed insurgency in the 1980s, with thousands of Sikhs then fleeing as India quelled the movement.
Many Sikhs ended up in
Canada
, which became home to the largest Sikh community outside India. While lots have since prospered and (for example) even gone on to become a
cabinet minister
, some have continued their Khalistan cause from Canada. Then…
In June 2023,
someone shot dead Hardeep Singh
Nijjar
in Vancouver (India
alleges
he headed the Khalistan Tiger Force, a listed terrorist group in India)
Then in September 2023,
Prime Minister
Trudeau
made explosive allegations that there was intelligence linking “
agents
” of India to Nijjar’s murder
In May 2024,
Canadian police arrested three
Indian nationals
over Nijjar’s murder, and
In August,
Canadian police warned at least one
Sikh leader
of threats to his life.
So what’s happened now?
Canada
says
it’s now found “
ample, clear and concrete evidence
” that those six Indian diplomats were actually “
persons of interest
” in Nijjar’s assassination.
What evidence?
Canadian officials are now briefing media outlets that they’ve
intercepted text messages and conversations
, all painting a picture of those Indian diplomats allegedly:
a) gathering intel on multiple Sikh activists before they were targeted by India-linked criminal gangs in Canada
b) using threats and withholding critical consular services as leverage to extract that intel, in an operation that was…
c) all personally overseen by India’s high commissioner (ambassador), and…
d) all authorised by Amit Shah, India’s powerful home affairs minister and a top ally of Prime Minister Modi.
So to re-cap for those playing at home, whereas Canada started out last year claiming that “
agents
” of the Indian government were involved in a single assassination, it’s now levelling that accusation
directly at the government itself
, at the highest levels, and is widening the accusation to suggest this all goes way beyond a single murder.
🔥
🔥
🔥
That’s why this is all in the news again.
And as if this wasn’t all intriguing enough, The Washington Post is now
reporting
that the Canadians presented the above accusations at a secret meeting in Singapore this past Saturday with India’s powerful national security advisor,
Ajit Doval
(who actually made his reputation quashing armed Sikh groups back in the 1980s).
That
Singapore meeting
didn’t go so well, and details soon leaked into the India media, so Canada has now gone public - again.
For its part, India hasn’t addressed some of the specifics above, but it’s responded with an
extraordinary statement
, rejecting the allegations as “
preposterous
” and attributing them to “
the political agenda of the Trudeau Government that is centred around vote bank politics.
”
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
It’s worth a quick look at the different ways this is now playing out in each country.
As
India
has become more confident, it’s also become more forthright in alleging Canada is harbouring Sikh terrorists, all while India’s spooks (‘RAW’) have shifted from defence to offence, and from a regional to a global remit. And that’s all dovetailed with Modi’s own political fortunes, burnishing his image as a Hindu strongman. But with Indian voters clipping his wings back in June, and Western partners now
backing
Canada’s claims, the costs for Modi are rising.
Meanwhile, outlets in
Canada
have (like India above) suggested there’s political mileage for Trudeau here given the size of the Sikh community (800,000 people). But any political interests have by now morphed into something much bigger: the notion that a foreign power might’ve been assassinating Canadian citizens on Canadian soil.
And then there’s
the US
, which is now
prosecuting
an Indian national over an eerily similar assassination attempt against a Sikh leader in New York last year. And that begs the question: why has President Biden taken a lower profile approach in response? Well, partly because he
can —
quiet US pressure still seems to have ousted one top Indian spy and led to the arrest of another. But also, Biden probably senses he
must
move cautiously — the US and India need one another as a counterweight to China.
Still, with India now allegedly joining the ranks of Russia and the Saudis in assassinating rivals on the streets of major cities abroad, there’ll be questions around the extent to which the West might’ve misjudged its new partner.
Also worth noting:
Calls for an independent Khalistan have lost momentum inside India lately, with many of the movement’s most vocal proponents now living abroad.
At the movement’s peak in the 1980s, a Sikh extremist blew up an Air India flight from Canada to India via Britain, killing all 329 people on board. The prime minister of India was also assassinated by two Sikh members of her security detail after an Indian raid on the holiest Sikh temple.
NEW SPEAKER ADDED!
Join us in Washington, DC for
“Securing Tomorrow: The Future of Cyber Threats and Global Defense”
on Thursday, October 24 at 6 PM EDT.
In an increasingly interconnected world, the stakes in cybersecurity have never been higher. We’re convening top minds to explore the cutting-edge of cyber defense, covering the escalating
global cybercrime industry
, the shadowy realm of
industrial and state-sponsored attacks
, and the critical need for
international cooperation
.
Confirmed speakers include:
Liesyl Franz -
Deputy Assistant Secretary for International Cyberspace Security, Bureau of Cyberspace and Digital Policy, U.S. Department of State
Dr. Kathleen Fisher
- Director, Information Innovation Office, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA)
Brandon Wales
- Vice President of Cybersecurity Strategy, SentinelOne and Former Executive Director at the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA)
Register now!
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇨🇳
China
: Russia’s defence chief (Belousov) has paid a visit to Beijing for
“
substantive
” talks
with China’s top defence official (Zhang). While Russia’s read-out boldly claims the two “
have a common understanding of what needs to be done in the current situation
”, China’s
read-out
sticks to more standard lines, and flags joint celebrations around next year’s 80th anniversary of WWII’s end.
🇸🇪
Sweden
: Stockholm has announced it’ll
boost Sweden’s armed forces by 27,000
troops to 115,000 by 2030. In explaining the extra $16B in defence spending over the next five years, the defence minister said "
we must be able to respond more strongly and effectively to the changes taking place in our surrounding world, above all Russia's full-scale invasion of Ukraine
".
🇲🇲
Myanmar
: The head of the military junta running Myanmar has called on the country’s ethnic militias to
join peace talks
to end the brutal civil war triggered by his regime’s 2021 coup. It’s the second such invitation in the space of a month, and comes as junta forces have now lost control of around half the country.
🇻🇪
Venezuela
: The Financial Times is reporting that the Maduro regime has now
cancelled the passports
of at least 40 journalists and activists since Maduro’s fraudulent re-election in July. Authorities haven’t offered an explanation, but critics say it’s all part of Maduro’s efforts to crush dissent in the country.
🇨🇩
DR Congo
: The government has
cancelled the auction of 27 sites
earmarked for oil exploration, citing late bids, irregular offers, and a lack of competition. The sites, called oil blocks, were first put on the market in 2022, drawing criticism due to their location in the world’s second-biggest rainforest.
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Here’s what people around the world have googled lately
🇩🇴
Dominicans
searched for ‘temblor de tierra hoy’ (
earthquake today
) after a
4.7 quake
hit near the capital Santo Domingo.
Car enthusiasts in
🇩🇿
Algeria
googled ‘
renault 4
’ after the French automaker
unveiled its new electric model
, inspired by the classic Renault 4.
And folks in
🇵🇦
Panama
looked up ‘
Tren de Aragua
’ after Panama’s leader confirmed the notorious Venezuelan gang
has a presence in his country
.
PHOTO OF THE DAY
Credits: AP news.
Turns out the 80s rockers
Toto
weren’t wrong when they said they could see the rains down in Africa.
Some stunning images have emerged out of Morocco, after the Sahara flooded for the first time in decades. Researchers say the unusual (and deadly) influx of water could change weather patterns in the region for months or even years to come, as the elevated moisture levels in the air will likely alter the delicate balance of the desert weather.
DAILY POLL
What do you think about Canada's handling of its ties with India?
📣 Serious crimes need to be confronted publicly
🤫 A quieter approach might've yielded better results
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
What's your favourite TV show or movie about diplomats?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
1️⃣ The Diplomat (27%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 2️⃣ The Peacemaker (4%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 3️⃣ The Interpreter (5%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 4️⃣ Hammarskjöld (3%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️ 5️⃣ Argo (22%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 6️⃣ In the Loop (6%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 7️⃣ Escape from Mogadishu (2%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️ 8️⃣ Madam Secretary (24%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 9️⃣ Long Shot (2%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!) (6%)
Your two cents:
6️⃣
C.L:
“
In the Loop
will never not be funny. "
'Climbing the mountain of conflict'? You sounded like a Nazi Julie Andrews!
" Honestly, Malcolm Tucker for UN Chief. Let's start the campaign.”
5️⃣
J.S:
“The early years of my career overlapped with one of the hostages in Argo which I thought was so cool. He even got one of my colleagues tickets to the premiere at TIFF!”
✍️
P.P.B:
“
Ambassadors
! A very realistic hot take of the British diplomatic service in the mid-2000s. They accurately portray why VVIP visits are important for diplomacy - but traumatizing for embassy staff!”
Was this forwarded to you? We're a team of ex-diplomats producing a concise and engaging geopolitical briefing for 100k+ leaders each day.
It’s free to subscribe
.
✏️ Corrections Corner
Thanks to those Intriguers who pointed out that yesterday’s headlines wrongly cited Google (rather than Microsoft) as the tech giant reviving the Three Mile Island nuclear site!