URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/pakistans-deporting-millions-refugees-migrants
Title: 🌍 Pakistan's deporting millions of refugees and migrants

Today’s newsletter supported by:
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
A French couple is suing a second-hand dealer for buying an African artefact off them for $160 then reselling it at
auction
for a cool $4.4M. But in a further plot twist, the row has piqued the interest of Gabon, which is now asking that the rare 19th-century mask be returned home.
Today’s briefing is a 4 min read:
🛂
Pakistan
is deporting millions of
Afghans
.
🇿🇦
South Africa
’s power problems somehow just got worse.
➕
Plus:
The European family is born, how the papers are covering a spying scandal in India, and world leaders gather at the UK’s artificial intelligence summit.
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇰🇿
Kazakhstan
: Luxembourg-based steel giant ArcelorMittal has agreed to
return its Kazakhstan operations to the government
after months of negotiations. A deadly underground coal mine fire last week might have increased pressure to finalise the agreement.
🇲🇪
Montenegro
: A
new prime minister
took office yesterday (Tuesday), months after Montenegrin voters headed to the polls. Milojko Spajić, the 36-year-old ex-finance minister and Goldman Sachs banker, heads up a coalition of pro-EU and minority parties.
🇹🇭
Thailand
: Authorities are moving to
impose extra regulations on sugar exports
to control the domestic supply and price of the commodity. Thailand is the world’s second-biggest sugar exporter.
🇻🇪
Venezuela
: A top court has
suspended the opposition’s primary results
, prompting the US to warn Caracas that it could roll back recent sanctions relief. María Corina Machado, recently banned from holding office, won the primary last weekend.
🇮🇱
Israel
: Bolivia
announced
yesterday it had cut all diplomatic ties with Israel, citing war crimes and human rights abuses in Gaza. The same day, Colombia and Chile recalled their ambassadors to Israel, while Brazil’s president reiterated calls for Israel to “
stop!
”
🛂
Pakistan | Geopolitics
Afghans leaving the Pakistani city of Karachi. Credits: Fareed Khan/Associated Press.
Why are millions of Afghans fleeing Pakistan?
Vast numbers of undocumented Afghan migrants have fled Pakistan to avoid arrest and forced deportation ahead of a 1 November (today) deadline.
28 days ago
, Pakistan
ordered
all unregistered migrants (including more than 2 million Afghans) to return to their countries of origin by today.
Some 600,000 Afghans had crossed into Pakistan after the Taliban’s return in 2021, often fearing Taliban rule and its associated reprisals.
Others have lived in Pakistan for decades or were even born there after the 1979 Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, with few real ties to Afghanistan.
So the UN has
warned
that Pakistan is risking a “
human rights catastrophe
”.
But Pakistan says it’s responding to security concerns, claiming 14 of the 24 suicide bombings since February have been carried out by Afghan nationals. Both the
Taliban
and
the US
have denied any role by Afghan refugees.
Intrigue's take:
Aside from the stark ethical dimension here, there’s a heady mix of politics and geopolitics at play.
On politics
, Pakistan’s caretaker government is meant to be arranging fair elections, but it’s
seen
as a continuation of the last unpopular administration.
On
geo
politics
, Pakistan’s erstwhile support for the Taliban has backfired, with the group’s local affiliates fuelling a
violent insurgency
in Pakistan.
So this mass deportation order partly looks like an attempt to bolster legitimacy at home, while pressuring the Taliban to change its tune abroad.
There’s evidence it’s popular with Pakistanis weary of hosting millions of Afghans, but it’s hard to see the Taliban becoming a better neighbour as a result.
Also worth noting:
Pakistan has
defended
the move as an “
exercise of Pakistan’s sovereign domestic laws
”, while calling on the world to help.
There are an additional
1.4 million documented
Afghan migrants and refugees who Pakistan says may stay in the country.
📰
How newspapers covered…
Claims that India hacked opposition iPhones
San Francisco, US
“Apple warns Indian opposition leaders of state-sponsored iPhone attacks”
London, UK
“India to Probe Modi Rivals’ Claims of iPhone Hack Attempts”
Mumbai, India
“‘Does the government have no other work': BJP* rubbishes opposition claim of alleged hacking of phones”
*The Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) is India’s ruling party.
Today’s newsletter is supported by: Babbel
Pack Babbel for Your Fall Adventures - Learn a New Language in 10 Minutes a Day
Whether you're venturing overseas for studies, dreaming of distant shores, or simply yearning for a fresh pursuit, now's your chance. Curl up with Babbel and let a new language warm your fall days. For a limited time, get up to 55% off your subscription.
Get started
🇿🇦
South Africa | Energy
South Africa is on low power.
Record losses and blackouts in South Africa
Rolling blackouts are so common in South Africa that the local term used to describe them (
load-shedding
) was
South Africa’s 2022 Word of the Year
.
Yesterday (Tuesday), South Africa’s state power utility (Eskom) published its annual
performance report
, and it’s quite the read. It says the company:
implemented power cuts on 280 days of the year
suffered record losses ($1.27B) for the financial year, and
saw a “
significant deterioration
” in emissions performance.
What went wrong?
Some of the factors include:
🧰
Poor upkeep of the old coal plants that provide 70% of its power
💸
Decades of mismanagement and corruption, and
🔋
An inability or reluctance to diversify the country’s energy base.
Intrigue’s take:
The government has pledged to split the ailing utility into three subsidiaries to make it more efficient, but the crux of the matter is South Africa needs more generation capacity - and that takes years to build.
Also worth noting:
Six of South Africa’s 14 coal plants were
scheduled
(
💾
) to be decommissioned soon. There are now plans to extend their life.
➕
Extra Intrigue
What we’re reading on AI:
3 new ways to check images and sources online
Biden hails ‘bold action’ of US government with order on safe use of AI
OpenAI debates when to release its AI-generated image detector
World leaders are gathering at the U.K.’s AI Summit. Doom is on the agenda
Trust in Focus: Leica Launches World’s First Camera with Content Credentials
🗳️ Poll time!
What should South Africa prioritise first?
⏰ Increasing any kind of power production, asap
🌱 Green energy production
⚖️ Prosecuting corruption within the energy sector
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
📜
Today in history
Delegates sign the Maastricht Treaty in the Netherlands in 1992
On this day thirty years ago, the European Union was formally established after the Maastricht Treaty (signed 20 months earlier) came into effect. The bloc has since expanded from 12 original members in 1993 to 27 today.
Yesterday’s poll:
Would you buy and eat Japanese seafood?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🐟 Yes, absolutely (51%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️
🤔
No, I'm not convinced (36%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ⛔ I hate seafood (10%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!)  (3%)
Your two cents
:
🐟
E.D:
“Personally I would still eat Japanese seafood and trust the IAEA's review.”
🐟
C.L:
“A little radiation won't be noticeably worse than the microplastics, heavy metals, pesticides, and other crap we throw in the ocean and gets absorbed into fish. Bring me that yummy, polluted, radioactive sushi.”
🤔
B.G:
“I would want to know how they are monitoring fish for safety.”
⛔
N.K:
“As a nuclear engineer, I don't see any reason why their seafood would be any less fit for consumption with Fukushima water in it.”
✍️
F.N:
“I’m vegan so it’s a non-issue.”