URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/pope-francis-ukraine-white-flag
Title: 🌍 Pope Francis, Ukraine, and the ‘white flag’

Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
I always used to scan the room when arriving at some kind of official meeting. On one occasion I recall being surprised to see, among the ambassadors and associated hangers-on, someone dressed in a full cassock with clerical collar: a Catholic priest.
It turned out he was not only a priest, but an ambassador too, serving the world’s smallest state. And yet it’s a state which also has one of the world’s larger diplomatic services:
Vatican City
.
Today’s briefing leads on the Vatican’s head of state (the Pope) and his remarks
calling on Ukraine to “
have the courage of the white flag
”
.
- Jeremy Dicker, Managing Editor
Shop the Intrigue store!
Was this forwarded to you? We're a team of ex-diplomats producing a concise and engaging geopolitical briefing for 85k+ leaders each day.
It’s free to subscribe
.
TODAY’S NEWS
Haiti prime minister resigns.
Ariel Henry, Haiti’s embattled prime minister, has announced he’ll step down “
immediately after the installation of [a transition] council
”. The announcement came shortly after a meeting with Caribbean leaders on Monday. He’s been unable to return to Haiti since earlier this month due to armed gangs calling for his resignation. The most prominent gang leaders are reportedly pushing to be part of the new power-sharing arrangement.
First Gaza aid ship departs Cyprus.
The first aid ship under a new
Cyprus Maritime Corridor Initiative
set sail from Cyprus to Gaza earlier today (Tuesday). When announcing the initiative last week, European leader Ursula von der Leyen said “
this is the first time that a ship is authorized to deliver aid to Gaza since 2005
.” The journey, which will take two days, comes after UN officials said some 576,000 people in Gaza are “
one step away from famine
”.
Putin fires navy commander.
The Russian president has reportedly sacked Admiral Nikolai Evmenov, the commander of Russia’s navy, after a series of embarrassing losses in the Black Sea forced Russia to relocate its fleet farther away from Ukraine. Putin is also expected to reshuffle his government after this week’s election.
China lodges complaint over India tunnel.
Beijing has lodged a diplomatic complaint with New Delhi after Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi officially inaugurated a tunnel along the contested India-China border. Separately, New Delhi is reportedly preparing to send an additional
10,000 troops
to its border area.
TOP STORY
Pope Francis, Ukraine, and the ‘white flag’
Pope Francis has sparked anger in Ukraine and beyond by encouraging Kyiv to have “
the courage of the white flag
” and enter negotiations with Russia.
He made the comments during an
interview
(
🇮🇹
) with a Swiss radio station - it’s scheduled to air later this month, but an excerpt began circulating this weekend.
Asked for his views on the
debate
between negotiating with Russia (the host used the term ‘white flag’) versus the risk of this just legitimising the “
stronger
” party, the Pontiff replied: “
I believe that the stronger one is the one who sees the situation, who thinks of the people, who has the courage of the white flag, to negotiate. And today, negotiations are possible with the help of international powers.
”
As the story gained traction, the Director of the Holy See Press Office, Matteo Bruni,
sought to
clarify
that the Pope “
uses the term white flag, and responds by picking up the image proposed by the interviewer, to indicate a cessation of hostilities
”. Elsewhere in the interview, he notes, the Pope also says that “
negotiations are never a surrender
”.
But the Pope’s comments were already
rippling across the battlefield
and beyond. The
Kremlin
deemed them “
quite understandable
”, while Ukraine’s foreign minister
rejected
the remarks, and urged the Pope to visit Ukraine.
Ukraine’s president, Vlodomyr Zelenskyy, then captured some of the national mood in a thinly veiled
reference
praising Ukraine’s frontline chaplains
:
“
This is what the church is – it is together with people, not two and a half thousand kilometers away somewhere, virtually mediating between someone who wants to live and someone who wants to destroy you.”
Beyond the battlefield,
Kyiv’s allies like
Germany
also criticised the Pope
, while the foreign minister of Catholic-majority Poland
suggested
the Pontiff should encourage
Putin
to “
have the courage to withdraw his army from Ukraine
”.
But there’s a bigger question you may also be asking…
why is the leader of the Catholic Church weighing in on this?
The Pope is one of a handful of religious leaders who’s also a head of state. In modern times, it’s been that way for the Pope since the Lateran Treaty of 1929.
So he’s a
religious leader
for over 1.3 billion Catholics across the globe.
But he’s also a
world leader
with a foreign minister (UK-born Paul Gallagher) plus a network of over
116
embassies (called nunciatures) - that’s more than Malaysia. And rather than weighing in on
national interests
like a regular embassy, these nunciatures focus more on what they see as
universal values
.
This network of churches and embassies is a source of influence for the Vatican on international issues, and
different Popes
have used it in different ways: for example, many credit Pope John Paul II with
averting
a Chile-Argentina war in 1978, or helping end the Cold War. Meanwhile, the beatification of Pope Pius XII remains
on hold
over his relative silence during WWII.
As for the
current, Argentina-born Pope
? He’s been calling for peace in various conflicts since taking the helm in 2013, including across Syria, Nagorno-Karabakh, Ethiopia, and the current Israel-Hamas conflict.
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
Geopolitics is shaped by states. States are shaped by people. And people are shaped by their beliefs. But it’s not often we (in the West at least) openly discuss the resulting link here, between beliefs and geopolitics.
The Pope is one of those few
world figures who openly fuses the two, resulting in some memorable (if apocryphal) moments, like Joseph Stalin’s WWII quip to President Roosevelt: “
The Pope. How many divisions has he?
”
It’s a line that reveals a lot: about the difference between power and influence, between material and moral power, and even about Russia’s view of the world.
Eight decades later,
the Pope’s latest intervention
brings the same questions to mind. He clearly has a degree of influence and moral power - that’s why world leaders respond, and huge crowds greet him from Congo to Ecuador.
But the thing is,
everyone
in this conflict says they want peace. In geopolitics, the question isn’t so much who wants peace, or even who has the courage to negotiate it. The question is how, when, and on whose terms. And that’s a question still being answered right now with something the Pope lacks: military divisions.
Also worth noting:
There are around a million Catholics and five million Greek-Catholics in Ukraine. It’s unclear how many Catholics are in Russia, though the local archbishop estimated last year it was less than a million.
The Vatican is one of 12 states still recognising Taiwan instead of China. In his 2020 book, Pope Francis referred to China’s ethnic Uyghur minority as “
persecuted
”, triggering criticism from Beijing.
The Pope is one of two Catholic Church representatives who also leads a state. The other is the Bishop of Urgell, who is joint head of state (alongside the president of France) of Andorra.
SUPPORTED BY MONEY PICKLE
Retirement Regrets: Not Making the Most from your Money
Choosing a financial advisor is a pivotal decision, one that can significantly impact your retirement comfort. A staggering 60% of US adults acknowledge their financial planning needs improvement, yet only a third have sought professional advice. Why the hesitation? The task of selecting from thousands can be tedious, and the stakes are high—your financial future.
Consider this: investing $500,000 could grow to $3.4 million in 25 years with a financial advisor, compared to $1.69 million through self-management. That's the power of professional guidance, potentially offering a double return on your investment.
Don't navigate this crucial process alone. Money Pickle's free tool effortlessly matches you with a vetted advisor at a time that best suits you. Avoid common pitfalls and step confidently towards a more prosperous retirement.
Take Retirement Quiz
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇦🇲
Armenia
: The foreign minister has told a Turkish TV channel that
Armenia is considering applying to join the EU
. He framed it as an effort to get closer to the West amid worsening ties with Russia, which has shown growing support for Armenia’s regional rival, Azerbaijan.
🇭🇺
Hungary
: The prime minister of Hungary, Viktor Orbán, has said Donald Trump “
will not give a penny in the Ukraine-Russia war
”, after
visiting the former US president in Florida
. Orbán, who’s openly backing Trump’s 2024 campaign, didn’t meet current president Joe Biden while in the US.
🇮🇳
India
: The European Free Trade Association (EFTA), made up of Norway, Switzerland, Iceland and Liechtenstein, has
signed a free trade deal with India
. The deal took 16 years to negotiate, and will see India lift most tariffs on EFTA industrial goods in return for investments over 15 years.
🇻🇪
Venezuela
: Following the president’s decision to call elections for July,
the opposition is now split
over next steps. Opposition figure María Corina Machado won 2.3 million primary votes in October but a court has blocked her candidacy, prompting some members of the opposition to call for a replacement.
🇱🇾
Libya
: Three key rival Libyan factional leaders say they’ve agreed on the
“
necessity
” to form a new unity government
and arrange long-delayed elections. The announcement came out of a meeting in Cairo hosted by the head of the main regional bloc (the Arab League).
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Here’s what folks around the world have been googling lately
🇭🇰
People in
Hong Kong
searched for ‘奧斯卡2024’ (
Oscars 2024
) to keep up with
Sunday night’s awards
(dominated by
Oppenheimer
).
🇬🇧
Coffee-lovers in the
UK
googled ‘
flat white’
to discover more about yesterday’s
Google Doodle
dedicated to the hot beverage, which was added to the Oxford English Dictionary in 2011.
And folks in
🇹🇷
Turkey
looked up ‘Son dakika deprem’ (
breaking earthquake
) after a magnitude
4.1 earthquake
shook the country’s northern coast.
CHART OF THE DAY
Bitcoin, the world’s largest cryptocurrency by market cap, traded above the $70k mark for the first time ever yesterday, breaking a record it just set last week. The surge was fuelled by an announcement from the UK financial regulator, which said it wouldn’t oppose the trading of cryptocurrency-backed securities.
DAILY POLL
Do you think it's helpful to take a 'peace at any cost' approach as a conflict mediator?
👍 Yes, it'll pressure the warring parties to end hostilities ASAP
👎 No, it could be unjust to one of the parties
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Which of the following do you think is the best asset to hold in times of crisis?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🥇
Gold (46%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
💵
The USD (11%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️ 🏠 Real estate (30%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 💻 Cryptocurrencies (2%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
📈
Bonds (3%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 🏛️ Stocks (3%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!)  (5%)
Your two cents:
🥇
A.D:
“Hard to bury anything else in your backyard..."
🏠
R.C:
“It's no coincidence that it has the word ‘real’ in it. All other alternatives have value as long as there are people interested in negotiating it... but people will always need a home.”
💵
P:
“Was taught in the Army that cash was one of the most important pieces of equipment you could carry.”
✍️
05:
“If history is anything to go by, toilet paper.”
✍️
R.H:
“A broad mix of assets. Even in times of crisis, diversification remains the only ‘free lunch’ in investing.”
Share the Intrigue