URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/putin-s-mounting-pressures-11fc9fb816ad8a26
Title: 🌍 Putin’s mounting pressures

Today’s briefing:
— Putin’s mounting pressures
— Don’t say that at the stadium
— Gotta see this resort
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Before we get into today’s quick update on
Putin’s wobbly economy
, indulge me just three thoughts on the NYT’s top 100 movies of the 21st Century, reflecting votes from 500 or so showbiz bigwigs:
First
, these lists often feature movies you
ought
to see rather than ones you
want
to see. So it’s refreshing to see so many cheek-achingly funny
comedies
in the mix, whether
Superbad
and
Anchorman
or
Borat
and
Bridesmaids
Second
, so many of these films also gave us an early
heads-up
on where our world was headed, whether it was
The Social Network
or
Her
(AI), and
Third
, Intriguers will notice just how many of the movies also offer a
window
into the broader world around us, whether it’s Korea’s
Parasite
at #1, Hong Kong’s
In the Mood for Love
at #4, or Japan’s
Spirited Away
at #9.
Anyway, onwards!
PS
- Thanks to all those Intriguers who’ve already pointed us in the right direction for our next
diplomat salary report
! If you happen to know how much your own country’s diplomats are paid, please do hit reply or fill out
our anonymous form
!
Date of the day
1 August
That’s when suspended US tariffs are set to resume unless trading partners do a deal.
The Russo-Ukraine War
There’s only so much monetary magic his central bank wizard (Nabiullina) can deploy.
It's been five weeks since President Trump gave Vladimir Putin a two-week deadline to get serious about peace, so let's take a quick look at Putin’s war, diplomacy, and economy.
Putin’s war
While Americans were celebrating the
4th of July
, and barely hours after the US and Russian presidents spoke again (Trump said the call went nowhere), Putin hit Ukrainian cities with his biggest attack so far, featuring ~500 missiles and drones. And that was just days after setting a similarly grim record the week prior.
Why?
Three years into Putin's full-scale invasion, he's still trying to erode Ukraine's
will
to defend itself, project a sense of
futility
to Ukraine's backers, and force some kind of
settlement
that ties Ukraine’s hands. Any ground gains now come at a staggering cost, so he's seeking to exploit Ukraine's air defence gaps instead.
Oh, and that
timing
(4th of July) isn’t incidental: it’s likely an attempt to
assert
Russian resolve,
defy
international pressure, and
mock
US power, hoping to seed more doubts around whether it's worth (or even possible) resisting. Which brings us to...
Putin’s diplomacy
As this all plays out, Putin is still pretty isolated: he should be crushing Caipirinhas at Rio’s
BRICS
summit right now, but he’s skipping it again because Brazil (an International Criminal Court member) would be obliged to arrest him over war crimes charges.
Now sure, he gets the odd visit from China's Xi or Iran's Pezeshkian or even Vietnam’s Lam, but the novelty arguably just highlights his isolation.
Ditto, Ukrainian intel claims tiny
Laos
might send sappers to help, but the numbers are so small, the intent seems more symbolic than practical: he’s not alone. But you might argue adding Laos to the mix (along with North Korea and Iran) sends rather the opposite signal.
Then there's...
Putin’s economy
After years of defying both sanctions and expectations, the wheels now seem to be wobbling. And don't take it from us. Take it from Putin's own top people:
His economy minister (Reshetnikov) just told a business forum in St Petersburg, "
we are on the brink of transitioning into
recession
"
His star central banker (Nabiullina) told the same audience Russia's sources of recent growth (like countless unemployed men) have now been
exhausted
, and
The head of his state-owned Sberbank (Gref) described it all as
a perfect storm
.
Interestingly, the impact is starting to reach
beyond Bolshoy Street
and out onto Main Street: car sales are down ~40% and farm machinery sales are down 33%, while inflation is still cooking at ~9% despite eye-watering 21% interest rates.
But as he ramps wartime spending up 20% while oil and gas revenues drop 12%, Putin has now burned through two-thirds of his (liquid) rainy day fund, potentially tapping it dry within a year unless oil prices improve or he cuts military spending.
But
neither seem likely
right now.
So while we don't know how all this plays out, it's worth keeping the above in mind as Putin tries to project strength via his airstrikes. Ukraine’s not the only one under pressure.
Intrigue’s Take
Relative democratic transparency means Western leaders are often more likely to
say the quiet bits out-loud
: Kentucky’s Senator McConnell, for example, often notes that US support for Ukraine’s self-defence replenishes America's stockpiles and weakens an adversary, while the opposite risks “
an illusory peace that shreds America’s credibility, leaves Ukraine under threat, weakens our alliances, and emboldens our enemies.
”
Outside the West
, however, we’ve often had to infer how leaders might be viewing all this. So we were surprised to see reports that
Beijing
might now be saying these quiet bits out-loud too, with top envoy (Wang) apparently telling his European counterpart (Kallas) that China doesn't want Russia to lose in Ukraine, as that'd free the US up to focus on China.
Meanwhile,
another message is getting louder
, too: leaders have long warned that Europe and Asia’s security are linked, with history showing trouble in one quickly engulfs the other. Beijing nodded at that argument when rejecting a small NATO liaison office in Asia back in 2023. But with the region’s tiny Laos now
potentially
joining North Korea and China in answering Putin’s calls (while Japan, Korea, and Australia back Ukraine), this has already gone well beyond some NATO bureaucrat arriving in Tokyo with a photocopier.
Sound smarter
:
Authorities just blocked gold mining tycoon
Konstantin Strukov
from leaving Russia, and are now moving to nationalise his company. Some are interpreting the move as a cash grab from the Kremlin.
Intrigue presents:
As seen in The Economist and Stratechery…
Meet the physicist, engineer, and fellow Intriguer now
making fuel out of thin air
: it’s the legendary founder of Terraform Industries,
Dr Casey Handmer
.
Don’t miss our chat with Casey! It’s online,
this Thursday
at noon ET!
Join here
!
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇧🇷
BRAZIL
-
BRICS wrap amid new tariff threats.
This year’s low-key BRICS summit wraps today (Monday), though the biggest BRICS headline might’ve played out elsewhere: President Trump is warning of a 10% levy on any countries siding with the “
anti-American policies of BRICS
”. (
BBC
)
Comment:
We often note the way Western blocs are struggling to grapple with a changing world, but this BRICS summit (with both Xi and Putin absent) is a reminder that the mooted alternatives aren’t exactly moon-walking right now either.
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
Major disaster declared for Texas floods.
President Trump has signed a major disaster declaration after flash floods left at least 80 dead (and dozens more missing) in central Texas. The situation is still hazardous as heavy rainfall is expected throughout today (Monday). (
CNN
)
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
Sports diplomacy.
A Maryland youth pickleball team has scored a personal shout-out from President Xi Jinping after wrapping a visit to China. (
Global Times)
Comment:
The historians among you will detect strong (and intentional) echoes of last century’s famous ‘ping-pong diplomacy’, with US-China table tennis matches helping thaw ties in the early 1970s.
🇹🇷
TURKEY
-
Do not pass go.
Authorities have arrested three more opposition-aligned mayors on charges widely seen as political. The opposition crushed last year’s local elections, denting Erdogan’s ruling party ahead of the 2028 presidential race. (
Euractiv
)
Comment:
Erdogan paid little for the jailing of his main rival (Istanbul’s mayor) just in March, so why not push ahead. Like so many before him, he’s resembling the very thing he once opposed.
🇸🇷
SURINAME
-
New president, who dis?
Local lawmakers have elected opposition leader Jennifer Geerlings-Simons as president after her party won the most seats back in May. (
France24
)
Comment:
There’s a bit of symbolism here: as Suriname celebrates 50 years of independence from the Dutch, the new president’s party was actually founded by a former autocrat and coup leader who died in hiding just last December.
🇦🇺
AUSTRALIA
-
Bibi weighs in Down Under.
Israel’s Benjamin Netanyahu has condemned Friday’s arson attack on a Melbourne synagogue with worshippers inside, demanding “
that the Australian government take all action
”. Police have arrested a man over the attack. (
The Age
)
🇿🇦
SOUTH AFRICA
-
You shall not pass.
President Ramaphosa will return home from the latest BRICS summit to another crisis, after a top cop accused South Africa’s police minister of obstructing investigations into various political assassinations. Details are still emerging, but the
allegation
is the police minister might’ve been trying to protect a criminal syndicate involving politicians, law enforcement, and judicial officials. (
Bloomberg
$)
Extra Intrigue
🤣
Your roundup of the world’s lighter news
A UK seagull has
snagged the coffee
of a guy trying to install anti-bird spikes.
Authorities in
French-speaking Quebec
have said it’s acceptable (though not preferable) to support your sports team with
“go”
rather than the French
“allez.”
Undergoing routine maintenance, a Maryland fire truck has…
caught fire
.
A snake has
delayed a flight in Australia
after stowing away in the cargo hold.
And a Florida super-fan has
rebuilt the boat from
Jaws
to re-enact his favourite scenes.
Lego of the day
Courtesy of Merlin Entertainments
Danish brand Lego just opened its 11th — and biggest — resort over the weekend, unveiling China’s first-ever
Legoland in Shanghai
. Some quick numbers for you: it’s got 75 rides across eight ‘lands’ using 85 million Lego bricks, all on a plot of land roughly the size of the Vatican (or three times the size of the Pentagon).
If any Intriguers make it along, please answer us this: does the Lego movie’s classic ‘
Everything is awesome’
song play on repeat?
🤞
Today’s poll
What are the best examples of sports diplomacy you've seen?
🇿🇦 South Africa's post-apartheid rugby world cup
🇸🇦 Saudi Arabia's big golf play
🇨🇳 Beijing's 2008 Olympics
🇰🇪 Kenya's marathon dominance
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Last Thursday’s poll:
Have you ever lived through a coup?
🪖
Yep, here's what happened... (14%)
🙅
Nope (say no more) (86%)
Your two cents:
🪖
P:
“I was at Clark Air Base in the Philippines during the People Power Revolution in 1986. I came to work one morning and the entire Philippine Air Force was parked on our tarmac, so that Marcos couldn't order them to bomb their own people.”
🪖
R.O:
“Not quite a coup, but I was in Thailand for the 2010 ‘Red Shirt’ protests which led to major clashes. I used to walk through the protests every day to get to my house, and before the violence was triggered, the protest camp was always a good place to find some delicious noodles.”
🪖
N:
“I was in Fiji in 2006, when the coup was deferred to allow a Police v Army rugby match.”
🙅
F.F:
“I wonder what percentage this poll will be in... say 10 years from now.”
Thank you to everyone who wrote in to share their experiences!