URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/new-template-partially-uploaded-12june-june-2023
Title: 🌍 Reports of a Chinese spy base in Cuba

Today’s newsletter supported by:
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
It’s been a
big few days for former world leaders: one’s been
hospitalised
in Italy, another’s been
indicted
in the US, a third has abruptly
quit parliament
in the UK, and a fourth in New Zealand has signed a huge
book deal
(after being knighted last week). And this is all before the milk splashed your Monday morning cheerios.
Today’s briefing is a 5 min read:
🇨🇺
A mysterious Chinese spy station in
Cuba
.
🌍
The clock ticks for the latest
cyber
-ransom victims
.
➕
Plus:
Norway loves EVs, how the papers are covering the Sunak-Biden meeting, and Apple takes its ducking time.
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇹🇲
Turkmenistan
: The US will work with Turkmenistan to help
cut its methane emissions
. The methane leaks from two Turkmen gas fields alone are greater than the UK’s annual carbon emissions.
🇮🇹
Italy
: Rome has agreed to a
major overhaul of EU migration policy
. Under the new deal, states will choose between accepting a certain number of asylum seekers or helping build migration facilities elsewhere.
🇧🇩
Bangladesh
: Officials have closed thousands of schools in response to the country’s
worst heat wave
in decades. The high temperatures are also leading to unprecedented electricity cuts.
🇭🇳
Honduras
: President Xiomara Castro
arrived in China
on Friday (9 June) for her first visit since switching Honduran recognition from Taiwan in March. Castro is seeking to attract Chinese investment for Honduras.
🇮🇷
Iran
: US and Iranian officials have denied reports they’re
moving towards a deal
to limit Iran’s uranium enrichment in exchange for US sanctions relief. Israel says it won’t be bound by any US-Iran agreement.
🇨🇺
Cuba | Intelligence & security
Reports of a Chinese spy base in Cuba
China and Cuba have reportedly agreed to build a secret “eavesdropping facility” in Cuba to intercept US communications, according to
The Wall Street Journal
(WSJ).
But the word
“reportedly”
is doing a fair bit of heavy lifting in that sentence. Both
Cuba
and
China
were quick to deny the report, which is hardly surprising. But then
US officials
started denying it, too. So what’s going on here?
First, there’s nothing new about spies in Cuba
:
🇷🇺
Russia ran its largest signals intel facility in Lourdes until 2001
🇮🇷
Iran once used Cuba to
jam
critical broadcasts out of the US
🇨🇺
A US spook just did two decades in jail for
spying for Cuba
, and
🇺🇸
The US has intel capabilities on its Guantanamo base there
But there’s not even much new about
China’s
spies in Cuba
:
📡
It’s long had
access
to an intel facility at Santiago de Cuba, and
🏗️ It was already
rumoured
to be upgrading another one at Bejucal
So then… what’s the big deal?
First, it’s China: America’s top
“
strategic competitor
”
Second, it’s Cuba: the last time a strategic competitor aimed something at the US from so close, we almost had a
nuclear war
And third, the WSJ said China was building an
entirely new base
Things got a
little
clearer over the weekend:
a US official
clarified
that China upgraded its intel facilities in Cuba back in 2019. So it’s possible the WSJ report was referring to this 2019 renovation.
Intrigue’s take:
Just as we were recovering from
balloon-gate
, this story breaks. And while it seems maybe there’s no
new
Chinese intel facility in Cuba after all, there’s a bigger picture here.
Like the spy balloon saga, this latest story is a reminder that Washington’s rivalry with Beijing is no longer limited to the far side of the Pacific Ocean.
Whether it’s floating 22km above the US mainland, or sitting 160km off the Florida coast, or steaming through the South China Sea… US-China competition is global.
Also worth noting:
China is now Cuba’s
main trade partner and tech provider
, and Cuban President Diaz met Chinese President Xi
in Beijing
last year.
The UN General Assembly has passed
a resolution
every year since 1992 calling for the end of the U.S. embargo on Cuba.
📰
How newspapers covered…
The meeting between UK Prime Minister Rishi Sunak and US President Joe Biden:
London, UK
“Sunak talks up free trade on his way to Washington DC to meet Biden”
Washington DC, US
“Biden, Sunak Announce Partnership on Clean Energy, New Technologies”
Kyiv, Ukraine
“Biden and Sunak affirm joint support for Ukraine during meeting at White House”
Today’s newsletter is supported by: atlas.co
Beautiful, custom travel maps - starting at $20.
Atlas is the only map company that lets you add your custom route to your personalised map. The process is simple:
Select your trip type
Style your map, move/edit your labels
Select your size and material type and submit your order!
Make your map today.
🌍
Global | Cybersecurity
Russia-based cyber gang claims massive hack
A notorious Russia-based cybercrime gang (‘Clop’) is
threatening
to publish data stolen from “hundreds” of organisations this Wednesday (14 June), unless the victims start ransom negotiations beforehand.
For its attack, Clop (
again
) exploited a vulnerability in a popular file transfer platform.
So its list of victims is long and getting longer. It includes the BBC, British Airways, Canada’s Nova Scotia province, the US state of Illinois, and more.
Intrigue’s take:
Meanwhile, the list of options for victims is grimly short:
Refuse to pay, and watch reams of your data go public, or
Pay the ransom, but embolden cyber criminals in the process.
For everyone else, the lesson is clear and getting clearer: yes, cybersecurity is expensive. But
not
having it is even costlier.
Also worth noting:
Clop
issued instructions to victims
via a blog post. It’s possible the sheer number of victims made individual ransom emails impractical.
Clop
conducted its attack
over the Memorial Day weekend. Hackers often attack during holidays when staffing is reduced.
🎧 Today on
Intrigue Outloud
Getty Images
What does a 2,700km ‘wall of sand’ have to do with a decades long territorial dispute?
Find out here!
➕
Extra Intrigue
Your weekly roundup of the world’s more extravagant news:
Japan’s opposition politicians
served beer out of backpacks
during a
Democratic Party for the People
fundraising rally.
Three Brits were rescued after their
giant inflatable duck
(nicknamed Quackers) drifted out to sea.
A cocker spaniel in Scotland broke a Guinness World Record by dropping
23 coins into a piggy bank in 1 minute
.
Three
giant seagulls charged unsuspecting passers-by
in Singapore and even gate-crashed a job interview (they were operated by Australian puppeteers).
Apple will
finally stop autocorrecting ‘ducking’
(about ducking time).
🗳️ Poll time!
Should companies pay cyber ransoms?
👍 Yes, the ransoms are tiny compared to the cost of not paying
😨 No, paying the ransom just perpetuates the cycle
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
📊
Chart of the day
Credits: Chartr
Nobody loves electric vehicles more than Norway.
The Nordic country has been topping the charts for years when it comes to EV sales per capita. China and the US rank 15th and 17th, respectively.
Thursday’s poll:
Do you think China's GDP growth rates have peaked?
🟩
🟩
🟩
⬜️⬜️
💸
Yes, the 10% growth rates of the 2010s are a thing of the past (77%)
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️
🙏
No, have a little faith  (22%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other, write in!  (1%)
Your two cents
:
💸
N.B:
“China has major demographic problems that can not be corrected. Their economy will not continue to grow at rates seen over the last decade or two.”
🙏
M.G:
“[China] continues to show prescient forethought about emerging technologies. They appear to be ready to dominate EVs for the next 20+ years, which will lead their economy into the latter 21st century.”
✍️
C.M:
“You can't trust the numbers coming out of China, so saying whether something has peaked or not is not possible.”