URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/russia-attempts-tame-wagner-group
Title: 🌍 Russia attempts to tame the Wagner Group

Today’s newsletter supported by:
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Life is full of plot twists, and nobody knows that better than the Ukrainian refugee who
just won a €500,000 lottery
in Belgium.
Today’s briefing is a 4 min read:
🇷🇺
The rivalry between
Russian
military factions is heating up.
🌊
What does
Asia
think of
US
-
China
tensions?
➕
Plus:
Venezuela is still in crisis, how the papers are covering the death of former Italian PM Silvio Berlusconi, and is Botswana becoming less exceptional?
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇨🇳
China
: Authorities are planning to
restrict file sharing via Bluetooth
and AirDrop to curb the dissemination of “undesirable” information. The new rules will close one of the few communication channels capable of bypassing China’s ‘Great Firewall’.
🇲🇪
Montenegro
: A pro-EU party has
won Sunday’s snap election
, but is unlikely to have the seats to form a government alone. Unlike in previous elections, this one focused on the economy rather than whether the country should lean towards the EU or Russia.
🇮🇩
Indonesia
: The Association of Southeast Asian Nations will hold its
first-ever joint military exercises
in September. They’ll be held on the edge of the South China Sea, which China largely claims for itself despite an international ruling to the contrary in 2016.
🇨🇴
Colombia
: The country’s biggest active rebel group has
signed a six-month ceasefire
after months of negotiations, in a win for President Petro’s “total peace” effort.
🇪🇬
Egypt
: All Sudanese citizens must now obtain a visa to enter Egypt,
according to new rules
reversing a long-standing exemption for women, children and the elderly. More than 200,000 Sudanese folks have crossed into Egypt since violence broke out two months ago.
🇷🇺
Russia | Defence & security
There’s rivalry between Wagner chief Prigozhin (L) and Defence Minister Shoigu (R)
Wagner faces off with the Russian military
The head of the Wagner mercenary group, Yevgeny Prigozhin, is defying
an order
to integrate his forces with the Russian military.
The order came on Saturday
, when Russia’s deputy defence minister instructed “volunteer formations” to sign contracts with the military by 1 July. Contracts would give these groups legal status and help develop a unified approach to the war, according to the ministry.
But Prigozhin flatly refused, and accused the ministry of incompetence, arrogance, and of seeking to cut Wagner’s supply of weapons and ammo.
And it’s hardly the first time this rivalry has flared up.
In recent weeks:
🔐
Wagner
arrested a Russian officer
for firing on a Wagner unit
🥊
Prigozhin
hinted
at deploying his troops inside Russia if needed, and
🏰
He even warned of “
revolution
”, and
denied
speculation he could stage a coup.
Intrigue's take:
Prigozhin’s fiery rhetoric is part of his negotiation strategy. Wagner and the defence ministry have tied themselves in a Gordian knot:
the ministry needs Wagner’s perceived effectiveness, and
Wagner needs the ministry’s military-industrial supply chain.
The two factions have managed to step back from the brink a few times so far. But as NATO-equipped Ukrainian brigades start probing Russian lines, this hostile union will be tested like never before.
Also worth noting:
Unlike Wagner, Chechen forces that have been fighting in Ukraine
agreed to sign contracts
with the Russian defence ministry.
Ukrainian forces appear to have
made some gains
during the first few days of their highly-anticipated counter-offensive.
📰
How newspapers covered…
The passing of Silvio Berlusconi, former Italian Prime Minister.
Rome, Italy
Silvio Berlusconi dead at 86, he revolutionised TV and politics
Tokyo, Japan
Silvio Berlusconi, three-time Italian prime minister, dies at 86
Doha, Qatar
Italy’s Berlusconi, ‘the knight’ known for scandals, dies at 86
Today’s newsletter is supported by:
The
Merge
If you like business and technology…you’ll LOVE this!
The Merge dispenses weekly knowledge bombs on the intersection of defense business, technology, and industry happenings—with a sprinkle of history, policy, and strategy for good measure.
It’s written by fighter pilots who are dedicated to making sense of defense in an edgy, enjoyable way.
Get smarter in five minutes each week—for free. People in the Pentagon and Congress read it, and so should you.
Check it out!
🌊
Indo-Pacific | Geopolitics
Asia fears getting eaten up in the US-China turmoil
Caught in the middle of US-China competition
US Secretary of State Antony Blinken is reportedly preparing to fly to China next week after months of US-China relations hitting repeated new lows.
And a new survey
from the
Eurasia Group Foundation
(covering Singapore, South Korea, and the Philippines) suggests many in the region will be cheering this resumption of dialogue:
💣 90% say they are worried about a US-China confrontation
📉
Most think US-China competition is
negative
for their country, both in terms of domestic polarisation and national security, and
➕
It’s not a zero-sum game: 31% have positive views of both the US
and
China, though the US is generally held in higher regard.
Intrigue’s take:
This isn’t academic for the region (if anywhere). Just last week, South Korea’s president addressed the impact US-China competition is already having on his country’s huge semiconductor sector.
So it’s not surprising the region would yearn for de-escalation. But that doesn’t mean the region wants a smaller US military presence: more than 80% of respondents think military collaboration with the US is a good thing.
Also worth noting:
In Singapore, 72% also support military collaboration with China.
Singapore and China
upgraded their relationship
in April.
➕
Extra Intrigue
We’re very online, so you don’t have to be.
How Russia went from ally to adversary
Is the Amazon really the world’s longest river?
($)
Saudi-Iranian rapprochement isn’t totally working
Is Botswana becoming less exceptional?
Foreign investors are fleeing Chinese tech
🗳️ Poll time!
What's the best geopolitics-related movie you've seen?
The Constant Gardener (2005)
The Lives of Others (2006)
Charlie Wilson's War (2007)
Argo (2012)
No (2012)
The Whistleblower (2010)
Bridge of Spies (2015)
Z (1969)
Syriana (2005)
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
💬
Quote of the day
Over seven million people have fled Venezuela since 2015, and the region’s politics have become less stable as a result. Venezuelan human rights defender Carolina Jiménez Sandoval joined us on
Intrigue Outloud
to explain how Latin American leaders can help (or harm) Venezuela.
Yesterday’s poll:
Should companies pay cyber ransoms?
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 👍 Yes, the ransoms are tiny compared to the cost of not paying (13%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
😨
No, paying the ransom just perpetuates the cycle (87%)
Your two cents
:
😨
K.L.W:
“The initial position of a victim should be not to pay, but there might be circumstances that justify paying the ransom.”
👍
C.J:
“We should not applaud companies for refusing to pay a ransom when the consumer's information is on the line.”