URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/saudi-arabias-sovereign-fund-looses-billions
Title: 🌍 Saudi Arabia's sovereign fund looses billions

Today’s newsletter supported by:
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Back in 2008, a lovestruck fella spent six months travelling 7163.19km around Japan with a GPS tracker to spell ‘
marry me
’ on Google Earth. His girlfriend then hopped on the nearest bus and spent a few months spelling out ‘yes’ (we’re joking, she just said yes straight away, but that would’ve been funny).
Today’s briefing is a 5 min read:
💰
Sovereign wealth funds
are shaping geopolitics.
🇸🇩
Sudan
peace talks stall.
➕
Plus:
Remembering the Live Aid concert, how the papers are covering judicial reform protests in Israel, and regulators face an antitrust dilemma with Meta’s Threads.
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇰🇵
North Korea
: Pyongyang has fired a
long-range intercontinental ballistic missile
into the Sea of Japan, triggering condemnation from South Korea and Japan. The weapon flew for over an hour, the longest-ever flight for a North Korean missile.
🇫🇮
Finland
: Prime Minister Petteri
Orpo’s new government
is under pressure as two racism scandals rock his coalition partner, the populist Finns Party. The Finns Party came second in Finland’s April elections.
🇲🇲
Myanmar
: Thailand’s foreign minister
met Myanmar’s detained former leader Aung San Suu Kyi
on Sunday, becoming the first foreign official to see the Nobel laureate since she was deposed in 2021. Thailand has sought to re-engage with neighbouring Myanmar’s military junta despite international concerns.
🇨🇦
Canada
: A corporate ethics watchdog has
launched investigations into Nike
and mining giant Dynasty Gold over allegations their operations benefit from forced labour by China’s Uyghur population.
🇸🇾
Syria
: At the UN Security Council, Russia (an Assad regime ally) has vetoed a proposed
nine-month renewal of a crucial aid crossing
to opposition-controlled Syria, insisting instead on a six-month renewal. More than 80% of goods travelling to Northwestern Syria must pass through the Bab al-Hawa crossing.
💰
Saudi Arabia| Geo-economics
Saudi Arabia’s sovereign wealth fund takes a hit
Saudi Arabia’s sovereign wealth fund recorded losses of $11B last year, down from the $19B in profit it made the year prior. The kingdom’s $700B fund is aiming to amass $2T in assets before the end of the decade.
Sovereign wealth funds
are state-owned funds that invest a country’s surplus cash, often generated through activities like commodity exports. They’re like private funds, but with fewer fleece vests.
And whether they admit it or not, sovereign funds are geopolitical tools:
🇸🇦
Saudi’s
fund aims to boost national prestige and diversify the kingdom away from oil, buying everything from Newcastle United and
the entire professional sport of golf
, through to
a new national airline
and a
vast city in the middle of the desert
🇳🇴
Norway’s
fund, the biggest in the world at $1.4T, has warned it’ll
vote against
the re-election of 80 corporate boards if companies don’t set up or hit environmental and social goals
🇸🇬
Singapore’s
fund ($287B) has invested two-thirds of its cash in its home region, but its chief investment officer says he carefully avoids “
areas that are in the crosshairs of US-China tensions
”
🇨🇳
And
China’s
main fund ($1.35T) says it’s more cautious about US assets due to bilateral tensions, and has sought to assuage concerns around its investments in Western strategic sectors, promising it won’t “
pose a threat to the countries it invests in
”.
Intrigue's take:
Who wouldn’t love to have a vast pile of cash, right? These funds can help stabilise an economy, generate income without levying taxes, finance massive national projects, or you can just go full Scrooge McDuck.
But they come with risks: without transparency or accountability, some funds can quickly burn public money through
incompetence and corruption
. And even the most ridiculously transparent and accountable country (we’re looking at you, Norway) can suffer brutal years in the market (see below).
Still, we’d rather have a vast pile of cash than… not have a vast pile of cash.
Also worth noting:
Norway’s
fund
reported a record
$164B loss
last year, citing Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, high inflation, and rising interest rates.
Singapore’s
fund
also just recorded
its worst result in years
, partly due to its stake in crypto platform FTX (remember them?).
📰
How newspapers covered…
Ongoing
protests in Israel against the government’s judicial reforms
Atlanta, US
“Israeli protesters stage ‘day of disruption’ against controversial judicial overhaul”
Jerusalem, Israel
“In knock at government, US urges Israel to protect anti-overhaul protesters”
Paris, France
“Israel protesters block highways, throng airport after passage of key clause in judicial overhaul”
Today’s newsletter is supported by: Tryiton
Studio-quality headshots, powered by AI
Our team at Intrigue needed new portraits, and, being remote (in three different countries!), a photography session was off the cards. We used Try it on AI to create AI headshots, which are now gracing our “About” section on the website! Curious to try?
Use "INTRIGUE15" for 15% off Try it on AI, valid for 48hrs only.
Try AI headshots.
🇸🇩
Sudan | Conflict & security
Sudanese general al-Burhan (L) has accused Kenyan President Ruto (R) of “partiality”
Sudan is still at war
Sudan’s army has rejected a proposal from the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD), a group of East African countries, to deploy peacekeepers in Sudan and help mediate peace talks.
The nation’s army has been battling the paramilitary
Rapid Support Forces (RSF) since mid-April. Several rounds of Saudi and US-led peace talks have since fallen through due to ceasefire violations on both sides.
So IGAD, currently chaired by Kenya, thought a more local response might help. But Sudan’s army
accused Kenya
of harbouring members of the RSF, and warned that IGAD peacekeepers would be viewed as “enemy forces.”
Intrigue’s take:
Meanwhile, Sudan’s army has welcomed a
peace summit
hosted today (Thursday) by Egypt, with whom it enjoys close ties.
And there’s the rub: it’s up to the warring parties to first accept that peace requires compromise. Until then, no mediator will ever be good enough.
Also worth noting:
U.N. chief Antonio Guterres has
warned
that Sudan is
“on the brink of full-scale war”
without successful mediation.
At least 2.9 million civilians have been displaced since fighting started, and at least 24.7 million Sudanese are in need of
humanitarian aid
.
➕
Extra Intrigue
What we’re reading about Microsoft’s acquisition of Activision and the world of antitrust.
Microsoft wins FTC fight to buy Activision Blizzard
The UK - which blocked the Microsoft-Activision deal - is ready to negotiate
Regulators face an antitrust dilemma after Meta launches Threads
PGA Tour official: LIV deal 'should not' violate US antitrust laws
🗳️ Poll time!
This year's Emmy nominees were just announced. Who are you hoping will bring home the 'Best Drama' award?
🌌 Andor
☎️ Better Call Saul
👑 The Crown
🐉 House of the Dragon
🧟 The Last of Us
💼 Succession
🍸 The White Lotus
⚽ Yellowjackets
🤷 Who cares?
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
📊
Today in History
The Live Aid concert in Wembley Stadium, London. Credits: Getty Images
On this day in 1985, 1.5 billion people turned on their TVs to watch Live Aid, a benefit concert held simultaneously in London and Philadelphia to raise funds for the famine in Ethiopia. Performers included Elton John, Queen, Madonna, Santana, the Beach Boys, David Bowie, and U2.
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think the concessions made to Turkey were worth getting Ankara to drop its NATO veto against Sweden?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
💯
Yes, absolutely  (84%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🙅
No, the price was too steep  (14%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 🖋️ Other (write in!)  (2%)
Your two cents
:
💯
R.N:
“No pay, no play!”
🙅
B.I:
“Caving into an authoritarian regime’s demands will only create more problems in the future.”
🖋️  B.B:
“Would have been better to bide time: Turkey realizes Russia's overreach & the concessions would have been less substantial next year with memory of Quran-burning & similar protests shortlived.”
🖋️ A.E:
“Military alliances are historically only effective at doing one thing, ironically, and that is starting wars. […]- A concerned Swede”