URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/six-thoughts-israel-gaza
Title: 🌍 Six thoughts on Israel and Gaza

Today’s newsletter supported by:
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Let’s dive straight in.
Today’s briefing is a 5 min read:
🚨
Six dynamics we’re tracking on
Israel-Gaza
.
🇲🇳
Mongolia
and France sign a uranium deal.
➕
Plus:
From CEO to world leader, how the papers are covering Ecuador’s weekend election, and manhole covers go on sale in Japan.
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇨🇳
China
: A South Korean ministry warned Friday that hundreds of North Korean dissidents living in China had been forcibly
repatriated back to North Korea
. Seoul believes up to 10,000 North Koreans are currently hiding (from Pyongyang) in China.
🇵🇱
Poland
: Voters at the weekend’s ballot
may have ejected
Poland’s ruling conservative party, with centrist parties poised to form government. The high-stakes campaign drove a record 73% turnout, with final results expected tomorrow (Tuesday) or later.
🇦🇺
Australia
: Voters roundly
rejected a weekend referendum
to recognise First Nations peoples in the constitution and create an Indigenous advisory body. Eight out of a total of 45 referendums have passed in Australia’s constitutional history.
🇩🇴
Dominican Republic
: Haiti has refused the Dominican Republic’s offer to partially
reopen their shared border
, nearly a month after Santo Domingo closed it to protest the construction of a Haitian canal. One Haitian official has said Santo Domingo should first apologise before moving to reopen the border.
🇩🇿
Algeria
: The Algerian Supreme Court has
upheld the 7-year sentence
of a journalist for “
inciting acts susceptible to threaten state security
”. Critics say the journalist was arrested for supporting pro-democracy protests in 2019.
🇮🇱
Israel | Geopolitics
Six thoughts on Israel and Gaza
After issuing an
evacuation order
for 1.1 million Palestinians in north Gaza, Israel has
reportedly
delayed its ground invasion in part due to poor weather.
So here are six factors we're tracking
:
🇮🇱
Israel’s internal dynamics
Israel says its goal in Gaza will be “
the rout of Hamas and the elimination of its leaders after the slaughter they perpetrated
”.
But there’s little clarity
on the contours of that goal, and less clarity still on Israel’s plans thereafter: few Israelis want another occupation, fewer still want any continued role for Hamas, and there’s little prospect of any external force emerging as a willing, able, or acceptable replacement.
So there’s talk of some kind of arrangement with the Palestinian factions running the West Bank. But they’d have little (if any) local legitimacy arriving in Gaza off the back of an Israeli invasion.
And this is all complicated by a fog of national anger and trauma;
sentiment
turning against Netanyahu; and the window of Western support inevitability narrowing as the humanitarian consequences in Gaza unfold.
🇵🇸
Internal Palestinian political dynamics
Hamas would’ve anticipated Israeli retaliation, but it seemingly miscalculated the degree to which Iran and others were willing to then step in directly.
So it's hard to see
Hamas leaders in Gaza surviving Israeli retaliation; likewise for its political leaders abroad (intriguingly, the Four Seasons has
denied
claims that Hamas leaders are at the luxury chain’s Doha hotel).
Meanwhile, the Palestinian Authority leader in the West Bank, Mahmoud Abbas, has increasingly
emphasised a distinction
between Hamas and the Palestinian people, foreshadowing more of a role for the Authority ahead.
🇮🇷
Iran
Iran’s other key proxy in the region (Hezbollah to Israel’s north) has so far limited its actions to within its long-standing but unofficial rules of engagement with Israel. And the group seemed to
dial back its rhetoric
yesterday (Sunday) after clashes with Israel along the Lebanon border.
So it’s
possible
that, notwithstanding
rhetoric
to the contrary, Iran doesn’t seem to be rushing to open up another front against Israel. And the sizeable new
US military deployment
off Israel would factor into Tehran’s thinking.
But the longer this all drags out and the worse the civilian toll in Gaza becomes, the higher the probability that Tehran’s calculation changes.
🇪🇬
Egypt
Egypt’s immediate priorities are its own regime stability and economic crisis, particularly ahead of December’s elections. And Cairo assesses that allowing large numbers of fleeing Palestinians out of Gaza and onto its restive Sinai territory would complicate both of these objectives.
But its military seems to be
establishing a buffer
5km from Egypt’s Gaza border, so Cairo may be keeping its options open pending any concessions (such as debt relief) it can extract from the international community.
🇷🇺
Russia
For Moscow, this is all a timely global distraction from its invasion of Ukraine, and a further stretching of the West’s bandwidth to respond. So it's seeking to sow tensions between Israel and Ukraine abroad, while mounting a massive (and so far very costly)
offensive
around Ukraine’s Avdiyivka.
For its part Ukraine, mindful of this dynamic, was quick to condemn the Hamas attacks, and there’s talk of President Zelensky visiting Israel soon.
🇨🇳
China
China held pro-Palestinian positions as far back as the Mao era, and its initial “
all parties
”
statement
last week angered Israel. But for now, this approach probably reflects Beijing’s general preference to avoid directly taking sides if it can. And this in turn highlights that there are still real limits to its power.
Also worth noting:
Media outlets continue to report on the
humanitarian crisis
unfolding in Gaza following Israel’s siege and evacuation order.
📰
How newspapers covered…
Ecuador’s run-off presidential election
s over the weekend
London, UK
”‘People are dying in the street’: Ecuador election overshadowed by violent crime”
Rio De Janeiro, Brazil
“Ecuador Votes Amid Crisis and Stalled Economy”
New York, USA
“Daniel Noboa, heir to banana fortune, wins Ecuador’s presidential runoff election”
Today’s newsletter is supported by: Patent Drop
Consumer Experiences Are Changing
From shopping and driving habits to the very way we enjoy music, a revolutionary transformation is underway. The rapid march of technology knows no bounds, leaving no aspect of society untouched. To maintain a competitive edge in this fast-changing landscape, staying informed is paramount.
That is precisely why we read Patent Drop. Delivered twice weekly to your inbox, Patent Drop scours the U.S. Patent & Trademark website to uncover where tech titans (think Paypal, Meta, Tesla), are investing their time and money.
Stay on the cutting edge, subscribe to Patent Drop right here.
🇲🇳
Mongolia | Mining & energy
Mongolia and France sign a uranium deal
Mongolia and France have reportedly signed a
$1.7B deal
paving the way for French uranium (and lithium) mining in the country.
Why uranium?
France currently operates 56 nuclear power plants, which accounted for over
60% of the country’s electricity needs
last year. And Paris is working to reduce its
dependence on Russian
nuclear fuel and other inputs.
And why Mongolia?
Mongolia’s landlocked location between Russia and China leaves it keen to diversify its partners. And that same strategic location also makes it a priority partner for others:
🇨🇳
President Xi
hosted
his Mongolian counterpart in July, and
🇺🇸
The US
hosted
Mongolia’s prime minister in August.
Intrigue’s take:
Resource partnerships with Mongolia aren’t as straightforward as they look. Russia has been attempting to develop the country’s uranium mining sector
since the 1950s
with little success.
Also worth noting:
Mongolia holds about
2% of the world’s recoverable uranium
.
➕
Extra Intrigue
Your weekly roundup of the world’s more curious news
A
cat jumping on a technician’s computer
caused a 4-hour interruption for a medical centre in Kansas City.
A New Zealander has broken the
world record for most bungee jumps in one day
by completing a nausea-inducing 941 dives.
Kyoto authorities have announced that the
city’s decorated manhole covers
will now be put up for sale to collectors.
The
Comedy Wildlife Photo Awards
feature a ballerina otter, a kangaroo playing the air guitar, and a fox seemingly puffing on a cigar.
And a clown enthusiast has been roaming the streets of a Scottish town, spooking villagers while daring the
police to catch them if they can
.
🗳️ Poll time!
In honour of World Food Day (today), what do you think is the best bread?
🥖 Baguette
🇨🇴 Pan de queso
🇲🇾 Roti canai
🥙 Pita
🇮🇳 Naan
🇮🇹 Focaccia
🥯 Bagels
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
🧑
New world leader of the day
New Zealand’s newly elected prime minister, Christopher Luxon, arrives at his party headquarters after Saturday’s elections. Credits: David Rowland/Reuters
Like seemingly everyone else this weekend, New Zealanders went to the polls on Saturday, propelling single-term parliamentarian Christopher Luxon to the prime minister’s office. His centre-right party’s “
back on track
” campaign brought six years of Labour rule to an end.
Before entering politics, Luxon (53) was CEO of Air New Zealand and Canada country head for British multinational, Unilever.
Thursday’s poll:
What are your thoughts on the way we've approached Israel-Gaza this week?
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇮🇱
Too pro-Israel (15%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇵🇸
Too pro-Palestinian (5%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
📈
Too much  (2%)
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🤏
Too little (22%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🤷
In good faith (54%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!) (2%)
Your two cents:
🤏
R.M:
“I just feel that the conflict, US carriers to the Gulf and the possible knock on effects and responses from other nearby countries merits more coverage.”
🤷
J.N:
“Commendably. In a sea of false dilemmas, it’s good to be in the Intrigue lifeboat of nuance.”
✍️
M.E:
“I’m against the targeting and killing of civilians but why does the West only seem to report on the loss of Israeli lives without reference to the loss of Palestinian lives over the past decades?”
We’d like to thank you all for taking the time to vote and leave a comment
🙏
-
Team Intrigue