URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/slovakia-dishes-another-electoral-surprise
Title: 🌍 Slovakia dishes up another electoral surprise

Today’s newsletter supported by:
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Spare a thought for the Aasvik family in Norway, who were hoping for a nice little Saturday, maybe heading over to
Bed Bath n Beyond
if there was time. But no, instead they went global after unearthing 8th century
Viking relics
in their lawn.
Today’s briefing is a 5 min read:
🇸🇰
What just happened with
Slovakia
’s elections?
🇲🇲
Is
Myanmar
’s
junta losing the civil war?
➕
Plus:
Tracking recessions through the publishing industry, how the papers are covering the weekend’s Serbian military movements near Kosovo, and… worst flight ever?
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇲🇻
Maldives
: Saturday’s run-off elections in the Maldives saw Mohamed Muizzu, the current mayor of the capital Male,
elected the country’s next president
. Muizzu had said the
incumbent president
allowed India to gain too much influence in the country.
🇨🇭
Switzerland
: Prosecutors have
charged Gulnara Karimova
, the daughter of Uzbekistan’s former president, with a range of financial crimes. Karimova, who served as her country’s ambassador to the UN in Geneva, has been in an Uzbek jail since 2014.
🇦🇺
Australia
: The Australian army will
retire its fleet
of Taipan helicopters after a training crash in July killed four soldiers. The army will replace the European Taipans with American-made Blackhawks.
🇧🇷
Brazil
: President Lula da Silva, aged 77,
underwent hip surgery
on Friday (29 September). Lula doesn’t expect to resume travel again until COP28 in Dubai, which kicks off in late November.
🇸🇸
South Sudan
: President Salva Kiir
met his Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin
in Moscow late last week for discussions on topics including energy cooperation. Juba has oil reserves amounting to 3.5 billion barrels, though production has stalled in recent years.
Slovakia | Geopolitics
Slovakia dishes up another electoral surprise
NATO and EU member Slovakia (pop: 5.5 million) went to the polls on Saturday to choose the country’s fifth prime minister in four years, following years of fragile coalition governments.
And former leader Robert Fico’s populist Smer ('Direction') party out-performed polls, winning the most
seats in parliament
with 23% of votes.
What were the key election issues?
At a domestic level, they included:
😤
Frustration with the previous quarrelling coalition
🏠 Living standards that still lag behind the rest of Europe
📈
A widening budget deficit and high inflation (10%)
🏥
A depleted health system, and
💸
A rising cost of living.
Fico’s winning party also ran on regional issues, including
:
⛔ A vow to halt military aid to neighbouring Ukraine
🛑
A vow to curb irregular migration over Slovak territory, and
🇪🇺
Broader scepticism towards the EU.
Fico had also
blamed
“
Ukrainian Nazis and fascists
” for provoking Russia’s invasion (a Putin line some Slovaks have
embraced
). And he just dropped an
all-caps Facebook update
(
🇸🇰
) labelling Ukraine as “ungrateful”.
So what happens now?
Fico needs to negotiate with smaller parties to cobble together a majority in the country's 150-seat parliament. The most likely outcome will see him become prime minister with a slim but functional 79 seat coalition.
But the second-placed Progressive Slovakia, which went from winning no seats in 2020 to scoring 17% in this weekend’s vote,
hasn’t given up
.
Intrigue's take:
As ever, there’s nuance here. Philosophically, the gap between what folks told pollsters beforehand and what they then did on election day suggests many voters might’ve been motivated along personal lines (eg, a sense of aligning with traditional Slovak rather than EU values).
Practically, any immediate impact on Ukraine seems limited: Slovakia has already given much of what it could spare, including its entire fleet of MiG jets. And it's hard to see Fico ending his country's own lucrative contracts for the manufacture of artillery shells for Ukraine.
But longer term, Fico's return could complicate EU and NATO efforts at unity on Russia. Still, he's often taken a more pragmatic approach once in power, and the survival of yet another coalition government might demand more of that now.
Also worth noting:
Slovakia has had a technocratic government since May, appointed by the country’s (largely ceremonial) president after the previous coalition collapsed.
Slovakia’s president is
currently suing
Fico for “
unwarranted accusations
” against her, including that she was a US puppet.
Fico stepped down as prime minister in 2018 amidst mass protests, following the murder of a journalist investigating corruption. Fico avoided corruption charges last year after lawmakers
narrowly voted against
stripping his immunity. He denied the charges.
📰
How newspapers covered…
Serbia’s military movements near Kosovo over the weekend
Ankara, Turkey
“US calls on Serbia to withdraw its 'unprecedented' military deployment on Kosovo border”
New York, USA
“Serbia's president denies troop buildup near Kosovo, alleges 'campaign of lies' in wake of clashes”
London, UK
“Serbia pulls some troops back from Kosovo border after warning from US”
Today’s newsletter is supported by: 1440
News Without Motives.
1440 is the daily newsletter helping 2M+ Americans stay informed - it’s news without motives, edited to be unbiased as humanly possible. The team at 1440 scours over 100+ sources, so you don’t have to.
Culture, science, sports, politics, business, and everything in between - in a five-minute read each morning, 100% free.
Sign up now
🇲🇲
Myanmar | War
Is the tide of Myanmar’s war turning?
Opposition forces control around 60% of Myanmar’s territory,
according
to the acting leader of Myanmar’s government-in-exile,
Duwa Lashi La
.
Myanmar has been in a state of civil war since soon after the military toppled the country’s elected president Aung San Suu Kyi in 2021. The junta has since used its superior firepower to retain control over major cities.
But beyond city limits, it’s been harder to get a clear picture
. On the coup’s second anniversary in February, the junta
admitted
that more than a third of the country’s townships were no longer under full military control.
And an earlier
independent report
suggested the junta controlled only:
🗺️ 17% of total land area, and
🏘️ 22% of all townships.
Intrigue’s take:
There are
all kinds of reasons
why battlefield reports out of Myanmar should be treated with caution. But the junta itself has seemed pretty surprised by the resistance, and there are ongoing claims of
desertions
, waning
foreign support
, and
attacks
closer to the capital.
But that’s not to suggest the opposition is in control; it’s
hinted
at some of its own challenges, including establishing a single chain of command across - and supplying - the hundreds of armed groups across the country.
Also worth noting:
Two of the junta’s top generals were
relieved of duty
this week amid a corruption scandal.
The UN human rights chief
said
last week that the junta uses airstrikes and village burnings to subjugate the population.
➕
Extra Intrigue
Your weekly roundup of the world’s funnier news:
An Australian man who
faked his own kidnapping
has been ordered to compensate the police for their investigation, to the tune of $10,334.
An airline has compensated a Kiwi couple who were
stuck next to a flatulent dog
in premium economy for a 13 hour flight.
A Phillies fan and his five-foot long
emotional support alligator
have been denied entry to a baseball game in Philadelphia.
A herd of hungry sheep have somehow
eaten 100kg of medicinal marijuana
in a Greek greenhouse.
And astronaut Mark Rubio has returned to Earth after
unintentionally breaking the US record
for the most time in space.
🗳️ Poll time!
Do you think Ukraine can still count on the US for military aid?
Congress excluded further military aid from a 45-day budget deal passed to avoid a government shutdown over the weekend
👍 Yes, this is only a bump in the road
👎 No, the signs are clear
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
📊
Chart of the day
Credits: Google NGram
Nothing sells like bad news.
So maybe it’s not so surprising that the word ‘recession’ spiked in the years following several major economic downturns in the 1980s, 1990s, and after the 2008 financial crisis.
Thursday’s poll:
What's some intriguing music from around the world we should check out?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🇧🇷
Pássaro (31%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇲🇱
Fatoumata Diawara (7%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇩🇪
Jembaa Groove (7%)
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇨🇳
-
🇦🇺
Mindy Meng Wang (11%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇮🇷
Kourosh Yaghmaei (4%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇬🇧
United Freedom Collective (10%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇿🇦
Sun-El Musician (7%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇺🇾
Sofía Alvez (6%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇮🇱
Dudu Tassa (9%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ (write in!) (8%)
Your two cents
:
✍️
B.B:
“Touareg blues just hits you hard with the hendrixian guitars in the desert singing the sounds of exile and nomad wanderings. Tinariwen is an excellent entry point but it’s a slippery slope from there - you’ll be checking the likes of Bombino and Tamikrest in no time!”
Honourable mentions
: Caetano Veloso, Ali Farka Toure, Jaro Local, Baby's Berserk, Bloodywood, Juana Molina, and late 60s to 70s Brazilian music (e.g. Caetano Veloso, Jorge Ben, Gal Costa, Gilberto Gil, Bola Sete).