URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/friday-9285
Title: 🌍 Something’s up in Indonesia...

IN TODAY’S EDITION
1️⃣ Something’s up in Indonesia
2️⃣ Intrigue’s weekend tips
3️⃣ Meme of the day
Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
One of my regrets growing up was that I didn’t learn any Bahasa Indonesia. Why? Because my dad’s first language was actually Balinese, a regional Indonesian dialect. He’d left the country when he was just five years old, so could barely speak much Balinese himself (let alone Bahasa)!
What I did learn growing up is that Indonesia is often overlooked in the great power competition game. It boasts the world’s largest archipelago, the third-largest democracy, and — most importantly for us Mee Goreng lovers — apparently the world’s largest packet of instant noodles.
While we sadly won’t feature Indomie in today’s top story, we will dive deeper into the country’s recent political and economic developments. Let’s go.
PS
— Ever wondered what it’s like to be foreign minister of
a NATO ally without a military
? Don’t miss our candid chat with
Iceland
’s Thordis Kolbrun Gylfadottir! It’s online next
Friday 28th
at
9.30am ET
(1.30pm GMT). Register
here
!
THE HEADLINES
Musk denies getting war briefing on China.
Elon Musk has denied
a New York Times report
(backed up by
The Wall Street Journal
) that he was scheduled for a top secret Pentagon briefing today (Friday) on US planning around any possible war with China. The claims (also denied by Trump and his defence secretary) have turned heads due to Musk’s presumed conflicts (like defence contracts and China business interests) plus the lack of any apparent need to know.
Fire grinds UK’s Heathrow airport to a halt.
An electrical substation fire has
closed the world’s fourth-busiest airport
, disrupting global air travel while plunging thousands of homes into darkness. While officials haven’t flagged this in public yet, you can bet the UK is examining the possibility of sabotage.
Europe to impose more Russia sanctions, but no Ukraine package.
European leaders meeting in Brussels have agreed to
pile further sanctions on Russia
, but they’ve stopped short of greenlighting a new military aid package for Ukraine — some leaders reportedly baulked at the hefty ~$50B price-tag, while Hungary played its usual spoiler role to block a statement of support.
Sudan military recaptures presidential palace.
The Sudanese military has
recaptured what remains of the presidential palace
in Khartoum, two years after the rival
Rapid Support Forces
paramilitary seized it. The Sudanese military now seems to have momentum in the civil war that erupted in 2023.
Zimbabwe’s Kirsty Coventry elected IOC president.
The Olympic swimming champion will be the
next president of the International Olympic Committee
, widely seen as the world’s most powerful sporting role.
TOGETHER WITH WUNDERBARTOGETHER
Join Intrigue at the WunderbarTogether Gala!
Got plans March 29th at 6pm? Are you able to be in Washington, D.C.? Join Intrigue at the WunderbarTogether Gala, celebrating US-German ties and the transatlantic relationship!
Keynote speakers include German ambassador to the US Andreas Michaelis, Condor Airlines Director of Sales Mikko Turtiainen, and more.
Snag a ticket here!
TOP STORY
Something’s going down in Indonesia…
The president of Indonesia, Prabowo Subianto.
Indonesia’s benchmark stock index plunged 7.1% within hours on Tuesday, triggering a temporary trading halt for the first time since early Covid.
And that’s captured our attention because
first
, Indonesia is Southeast Asia’s biggest economy, and
second
, we were just writing about the conga-line of
tech CEOs flying there
for a slice of the country’s enormous potential.
So, what’s happening?
Some of the drivers here are beyond Indonesia’s control — many emerging markets have wobbled since Donald Trump’s election, as a strong dollar, volatile trade outlook, and occasional recession jitters spook investors.
But other drivers here sit squarely within the remit of Indonesia’s new president, Prabowo Subianto. So here are three to consider:
Centralising power
Prabowo has been
in and out of Indonesia’s limelight
for decades, whether: a) commanding the country’s Kopassus special forces, b) marrying the daughter of long-time strongman Suharto, c) becoming defence minister after losing the 2019 election, or then d) finally becoming president in October.
But since achieving his life’s ambition, he’s rushed to concentrate power. For example, he can now create
unlimited new ministries
, and just this week pushed through reforms to allow fellow
military brass to serve in government
without resigning. Critics argue both moves expand the scope for patronage and populism, and that’s spooked investors.
But what’s the fun in accumulating all that power if you don’t then dabble in a bit of…
Economic interventionism
Prabowo’s campaign last year really promised more of the same when it came to the economy, essentially riding in the political slipstream of his popular predecessor (Jokowi) whose decade in power featured solid growth and shiny new infrastructure.
But then Prabowo took the reins and shook things up:
Last month, he launched a
new sovereign wealth
fund
that’ll absorb seven of Indonesia’s vast state-owned enterprises, all answering directly to the president himself rather than his finance minister (Indrawati), and speaking of whom…
Finance Minister Indrawati
just spent days denying resignation rumours after being surprised by Prabowo’s drastic 8% budget cuts (to top up his new fund) — she’s a market darling who’s held the purse strings for 14 of the last 20 years.
And all this just spooks investors even further, particularly when combined with…
Deflation
Indonesia just posted its first annual
de
flation in 25 years, potentially reflecting deeper problems like declining demand. And while the solution usually includes
expansionary
policies, Prabowo is now doing the opposite with his epic 8% budget cuts.
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
The immediate trigger for Tuesday’s 7% crash was probably the rumoured resignation of the finance minister (Indrawati). And the very fact everyone
believed
this rumour at all reveals plenty of information itself:
First
, recall that Prabowo initially
re-appointed Indrawati
to her role to help
calm
markets after winning the election — investors feared his spending plans.
But
second
, this only soothes markets if you actually
listen to Indrawati
and let her hold — or at least be aware of — the purse strings, which brings us to…
Third
, the sheer plausibility of her rumoured resignation stems from the huge gap between her long-standing credibility and Prabowo’s unorthodox budget — there’s no way a market darling like Indrawati would’ve backed it all.
And
fourth
, while she hastily called a press conference to deny the rumours and reiterate her pledges to maintain fiscal discipline and transparency, this whole saga suggests maybe those pledges are simply no longer hers to give.
Also worth noting:
While Prabowo’s budget cuts and other measures have triggered protests, his
approval ratings
still entered the year above 80%.
Indonesia’s tax revenues are down 30% this year due to lower commodity prices. Meanwhile, Prabowo’s spending plans include a vast new school meals program projected to cost an annual $29B.
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇷🇺
Russia
: Ukraine has
hit Russia’s Engeles-2 air base with drones
overnight, triggering a massive blast at the airfield from where Russia routinely bombs Ukrainian cities. Ukrainian and Russian delegations are due to hold separate peace talks with a US delegation in Riyadh this coming Monday.
🇮🇳
India
: Elon Musk’s ‘X’
social media platform is suing India
, alleging Delhi’s use of a website to manage government content-blocking orders has ended up empowering “
countless
” officials to censor speech without oversight. The case is due for hearing next week.
🇦🇺
Australia
: Canberra has flagged plans for its biggest ever defence export, selling its
world-leading over-the-horizon radar tech
(‘JORN’) to Canada for US$4B. The US had reportedly been first in line to buy the tech, but that’s now in doubt amid an ongoing cost-cutting drive at the Pentagon.
🇵🇪
Peru
: A 30-day state of emergency is now underway in Peru’s capital, with soldiers in the streets to
help police tackle a recent surge in crime
. The government announced the measures amid public outrage over the killing of popular singer Paul Flores last weekend.
🇨🇩
DR Congo
: Defying yesterday’s ceasefire calls from the leaders of the Congo and Rwanda,
M23 rebels have now captured a strategic crossroads town
linking four provinces in the Congo’s east. The area (Walikale) is also home to the Congo’s largest tin deposits, plus several major gold mines.
FROM OUR SPONSORS
Stop Overpaying for Ink: Smart Printing Starts with HP Instant Ink
Ditch traditional ink cartridges and join the smart printing revolution! HP Instant Ink offers a smarter, more economical way to print. Your subscription ensures you only pay for the pages you print per month, saving you up to 50% compared to individual cartridges. Plus, enjoy automatic ink delivery, convenient recycling, and $10 off your subscription to sweeten the deal. Stop wasting money on unnecessary ink – embrace the future of printing with HP Instant Ink, America’s most trusted print brand.
Claim Your $10 Credit
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Some recommendations for the weekend ahead:
Read
a delightfully written ode to the martini, whatever it is, by
LA Times restaurant critic Bill Addison
, because not everything has to be so serious (and then drink one, mixed to your liking, should you be so minded).
Watch
an episode of
Dirt
, a travel/food miniseries by outdoor brand Huckberry. Maybe start with
Surf and Eat Like a Local in Minnesota
which showcases both the stunning beauty of the state, but also the cuisine of the Hmong, a people from Southeast Asia who migrated to the state en masse after the wars in Laos in the 70s.
Go to your local cinema
and catch a screening of
Steven Soderbergh’s sleek spy thriller,
Black Bag
. Expect incisive dialogue, suave visuals, and a mercifully short running time.
MEME OF THE DAY
From our resident meme lord Jeremy (@DickerPicss on Insta)
Our meme above recently went viral, seemingly because diplomats everywhere found it a brutally accurate snapshot of what diplomat life is actually like. It involves lots of:
Dining
in the national interest (we’ve found ‘stakeholders’ and ‘interlocutors’ tend to offer the juiciest insights between bites of Wagyu and sips of Chablis)
Attending
random events
(sorry Kazakhstan), not necessarily because they’re interesting, but because your
fellow guests
might be interesting, and
Whiplash
as you go from defending the national interest to arranging a puppet show, laminating a briefing pack, then begging for a promotion.
FRIDAY QUIZ
Folks in the northern hemisphere just experienced the Spring Equinox yesterday (Thursday).
1) What happens on an equinox?
Night and day are the same length
The sun dissapears behind the moon
The sun is at its furthest from Earth
Earth's rotation slows down imperceptibly
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) When was the last time the Spring equinox occurred on March 19?
2024
2001
1796
1300
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) Which of the following calendars starts on the Spring equinox?
Gregorian calendar
Persian calendar
Lunar calendar
Thai solar calendar
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Was this forwarded to you? We're a team of ex-diplomats producing a concise and engaging geopolitical briefing for 120k+ leaders each day.
It’s free to subscribe
.