URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/special-edition-what-s-next-for-germany
Title: 🕵️ Special edition: What's next for Germany

Know someone who’d enjoy this briefing? Feel free to forward it! We're a team of ex-diplomats producing a concise and engaging geopolitical briefing for 100k+ leaders each day.
It’s free to subscribe
.
Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Germany did not have a good 2024 — not economically and certainly not politically. Not even the Olympics brought succour as German athletes turned in their worst Summer Games performance since reunification in 1990, but that’s a different story for a different newsletter.
But before we take a look at what 2025 might have in store for Germany, let’s quickly lay out why we should all care about the country and its future:
Germany has the EU's biggest economy
and the world's fourth-largest and is the largest country in Europe by population
That’s why
it is still the most important country within the EU
(though I can almost hear the angry splutter of croissants being spat out onto French sidewalks in protest at that statement)
Germany is Ukraine's top individual donor after the US
and is thus crucial to the resolution of Europe’s biggest conflict since World War II
And crucially,
it's in the midst of real political and economic upheaval
— its economy is in recession, its government collapsed in November, and the rise of the right-wing Alternative for Germany (AfD) in the East has caused alarm in Europe, given the country's difficult history.
So, just hours before we ring in 2025, days before Trump retakes office, and weeks before Germany hosts snap elections,
there's no better time to take stock of where Germany is, how it got there, and what's next
for one of the world's most consequential countries.
P.S. We’ve got one more special briefing dropping for you this week before the Best Daily Global News Briefing in the World™️ returns to your inbox next Monday, 6 January.
Germany’s geopolitics
The German parliament, or Bundestag. Credits: German Bundestag/ Neumann
Germany has two great geopolitical nemeses – France to the west and Russia to the east.
Germany sits on the Northern European Plain, aka the
invasion superhighway of Europe
, a flat expanse across which armies and tanks can move with ease.
Ever since German unification (the first one) in 1871,
Germany’s grand strategy
has focused on thwarting France and Russia as threats.
In both World Wars, the German army attacked France, seeking a defensible holding position on the western front before attacking Russia to the east.
But even in peacetime, Germany’s strategic position has been the same, “
neutralising
” France not with tanks but with
mutual economic interdependence
(the European Coal and Steel Community would eventually become the EU and still ties French and German fates together). Meanwhile,
Germany’s membership of NATO
kept the Soviets and now Russians at bay.
❝
Germany has two great geopolitical nemeses – France to the west, and Russia to the east.
That strategy helped Germany thrive during
history’s fleeting moment of US unipolar power
, using the intoxicating cocktail of Russian gas, Eastern European labour, US security, and EU economic heft to export German products to China and beyond. But that’s all now changing with Chinese competition, American fatigue, Russian aggression, and EU indecision.
Of course, this is an oversimplification of centuries of history, but it’s the bare minimum necessary to understand the country’s current predicament, which leads us to…
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine
German Chancellor Olaf Scholz during his 2 Dec trip to Kyiv. Credits: AP Photo/Evgeniy Maloletka
Shortly before Russia attempted its full-scale invasion of Ukraine in February 2022, Germany offered Kyiv’s defenders
5,000 protective helmets
… because supplying Ukraine with weapons would’ve meant an irreparable breach in German-Russian relations.
After all, the country was (and still is) led by German Chancellor
Olaf Scholz
, who, like his predecessor Angela Merkel, supported the construction of the Nord Stream 2 pipeline to hoover up more Russian gas, despite vociferous US and Eastern European objections over the risk of Russia ending up with too much leverage.
Germany had more
moments of hesitation
, initially declining to provide Ukraine with tanks until the US did it first, but it is now Ukraine’s top individual backer after the US:
Germany has given $17B in military, humanitarian, and economic aid
Its popular defence minister has pledged to support Kyiv “
as long as it takes
”
Germany has pledged to double down on this support ahead of Trump’s second administration
So, why the pro-Ukraine pivot?
A few months into the war, it became clear that Germany’s long-held policy of ‘peace through commerce’ was in tatters and that a new approach was needed. As for what exactly drove Germany’s decision, it was not just the values at stake but also the combination of Russia’s ongoing sabre-rattling and Ukraine’s unexpected success on the battlefield.
But even still, Germany has turned down multiple Ukrainian pleas for help, including for access to the legendary German-Swedish Taurus missile, which could (for example)
easily destroy Russia’s critical Kerch Strait Bridge,
which connects Russia’s mainland to Crimea
,
facilitating a key staging point for its attacks on broader Ukraine.
FROM OUR SPONSORS
Unlock the power of AI without sacrificing your data.
Completely Private
No data exploitation or surveillance
Intelligent insights, yours alone
Ask Uncensored AI
So, what’s next?
Scholz has doubled down on his pro-Ukraine messaging
since Donald Trump's election as US President:
He made an unannounced visit to Kyiv in early December (his first since the very beginning of the war), during which he announced an additional $685M military package
He also promised that Berlin would “
remain the strongest supporter of Ukraine in Europe
”, and
His foreign minister (Baerbock) has refused to rule out deploying soldiers to Ukraine as part of a future peace deal.
If the polls hold true and another coalition ends up ruling Germany, you can be
relatively
sure they’ll maintain Scholz’s pro-Ukraine stance.
But it’s not so simple: while most Germans back Ukraine, they’re also frustrated with their economy and weary of unchecked migration, meaning they could cast their votes for parties promising change on those issues even if it means pulling back support for Ukraine.
In fact,
the top polling parties ahead of the election on 23 February have some wildly differing Ukraine policies:
The opposition centre-right
Christian Democrats
(CDU) are currently polling first at ~31%. Party leader Friedrich Merz has often accused Scholz of being too hesitant in his support for Kyiv and is pledging Taurus missiles for Ukraine.
The hard-right
Alternative for Germany
(AfD) is polling second at around ~18% and has had several successes in local elections by focusing on concerns around migration and law and order. But it’s also the most Ukraine-sceptic party in the Bundestag, pushing to end German military support for Ukraine and stabilise ties with Russia (which also means we should expect reports of Russian election interference in support of the AfD).
Meanwhile, the ruling coalition’s
Greens
are polling around ~13%. They are fervent in their support for Kyiv and echo the CDU’s pledge to send Taurus missiles.
And Scholz’s own ruling
Social Democrats
(SPD), who continue to try and thread the needle with their reliable but restrained support for Kyiv, polling at around ~15%.
CDU leader Friedrich Merz is among the top contenders to become the next German Chancellor. Credits: AFP via Getty Images.
Meanwhile, Russia and Ukraine are each pushing to maximise their leverage before Trump 2.0 potentially tries to impose some kind of settlement amid continued mixed signals:
NATO’s new boss Mark Rutte has suggested Ukraine should put off any peace talks with Russia until it can push harder using incoming Western military aid, and
Ukraine’s Volodymyr Zelensky seems to have shifted his rhetoric, suggesting Ukraine could stop fighting to regain land lost to Russia in exchange for NATO membership (i.e. robust guarantees Russia won’t invade again).
❝
Russia and Ukraine are each pushing to maximise their leverage before Trump 2.0 potentially tries to impose some kind of settlement amid continued mixed signals
Given that most parties appear to be preparing for a possible way out, it’s worth considering Germany’s possible role in Ukraine’s post-war scenario beyond any security guarantees.
It’s hard to see a post-war Ukraine without a major German industrial presence,
whether as a source of labour, winning major contracts to rebuild Ukraine’s tattered infrastructure, or helping restore its damaged agricultural fields.
But the degree to which Germany, Poland, and others can play this kind of role will depend on Ukraine’s progress in tackling corruption, which is often tied to international financial assistance.
But don’t bet against Germany!
The media narrative has been pretty sceptical of Germany lately
, perhaps not unfairly:
Its demographics are skewing old
Its economy is slowing down
Its 20th-century export model can’t withstand 21st-century headwinds
And Germany’s political establishment often writes checks its rear end can’t cash
Protests outside the Bundestag. Credits: Hami Roshan/AFP via Getty Images.
But what this narrative overlooks is that, when confronted with a crisis, modern Germany has outperformed:
When East and West Germany unified, the narrative was that it’d take generations and untold billions to reintegrate East with West. Instead, it powered a new generation of German (and European) growth.
In the late 1990s,
The Economist
famously described Germany as the “
sick man of the euro
”. Instead,
th
e German DAX went on to triple, way outperforming the FTSE MIB (its Italian equivalent) and the IBEX (its Spanish equivalent).
Germany made hay while the sun shined during the unipolar moment of American power, which clearly papered over some more fundamental cracks in the country’s political, economic, and social reality.
Underwhelming Olympic performance aside, there’s no doubt that Germans have plenty of other reasons to be unhappy right now.
But Germans are, and forgive the cliche, pragmatic people. As we move into a more volatile geopolitical world governed less by idealistic value-based systems and more by cold realpolitik, pragmatism might be exactly what ensures Germany stays at the top for decades to come.