URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/2-jan-aukus-3
Title: 🌍 Special edition: AUKUS (3 of 3)

Today’s special edition:
— Is AUKUS ready for the next war?
— Euro’s newest member
— Iran’s protests spread
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Happy new year, dear Intriguers! We hope you had a joyous time closing out 2025 with your loved ones and wish you a peaceful and quiet 2026 - even if it’s looking to be another eventful year geopolitically.
For those who may have passed out on the couch or headed to bed early and missed the New Year’s Eve countdown altogether at midnight, fret not. There are plenty of other opportunities for you to celebrate outside of the Gregorian calendar.
For example, folks in Asia can look forward to the Lunar new year in February to welcome the Year of the Horse, and others in the Middle East celebrating Nowruz can kickstart their year at the start of spring in March. So if you’ve not started on those New Year’s resolutions, you’ve still got plenty of time…
Onto today’s story for the third and final instalment of
our AUKUS briefing
.
PS
— We’ll be back to our regular weekday briefing schedule from
Monday
.
Number of the day
1 billion
That’s roughly how many people tuned in worldwide to watch the New Year’s Eve countdown ball drop in Times Square, New York. A million or so braved the frigid NYC temperatures to watch it in-person.
The war of the future?
Now that we’ve briefed you on
the bigger picture strategy
behind the Australia-UK-US AUKUS pact, and its most eye-catching deliverable (
nuclear-powered subs for Australia
), it’s time to wrap this special series with a look at the other half of AUKUS, sexily called Pillar II
🔥
🔥
🔥
.
Focusing on other
advanced defence tech
, it’s about pooling everyone’s resources and strengths to maximise interoperability and counter China’s massive leaps forward.
And to do so, this second pillar leans less on the big government-led programs needed for nuclear subs, and more on investing billions across commercial R&D.
China debuted several new drones in September. Pic from CCTV.
But where’s all that cash coming from?
Government defence innovation units still provide seed funding and run innovation challenges to identify, test, and de-risk new ideas, but the idea is to then crowd-in private investors (rather than stretched government budgets) to ramp it all up.
And one way they’re seeking to lure that sweet sweet private cash is via a new
AUKUS Defense Investors Network
consisting of
~400 venture capital and family office outfits
from across the US, UK, and Australia, collectively managing up to $400B.
With AUKUS swallowing a bigger chunk of the trio’s defence spending, the idea is to have a pool of clean, trusted capital (ie without adversarial influence) that’s comfortable around — and educated on — defence, then looped into the investment opportunities early.
But where do these three allies want all this cash to go?
Australia, the UK, and the US have identified
eight priorities
, including…
Cyber
, with an emphasis on protecting critical infrastructure
AI
and autonomy, to accelerate safe adoption of drone systems and beyond
Quantum
, with potential uses across navigation, tracking, and encryption
Undersea
, particularly robotic and drone systems
Hypersonics
, which can overwhelm foes by travelling at five times the speed of sound (China has them already, while Russia and North Korea both claim them)
Electronic warfare
, which is about dominating the electromagnetic spectrum (we’ve seen this kind of jamming and tracking in the Russo-Ukraine war)
Integration
, which focuses on plugging more startups into defence — and getting their tech from the lab out to the frontlines — asap, and
Information sharing
, which focuses on streamlining secure data exchange and export controls (like America’s strict ‘ITAR’ rules) so everyone can work together.
The UK hosted the first AUKUS AI and autonomy trials in 2023. Pic from the UK’s MoD.
Of course, that emphasis on new tech is creating
opportunities for newer players
, the most famous of which is probably California-based Anduril (turns out having a mullet-clad, Hawaiian shirt-draped childhood-genius co-founder is good PR). It’s already delivered the underwater ‘
Ghost Shark
’ drone to Australia’s navy, and is developing fighter jet ‘wingmen’ drones for the US military.
All that to say… this AUKUS Pillar II ramp-up means investment opportunities won’t just be limited to the usual defence primes that Wall St analysts traditionally obsess over, like Lockheed or Raytheon, but a vast array of smaller, more specialised players.
And interestingly, this
investment spree
might not just be limited to the original Australia, UK and US trio, either: other partners like Canada, New Zealand, Japan, and South Korea have been floating their interest in joining this pillar (not the subs one) too.
“
Turns out having a mullet-clad, Hawaiian shirt-draped childhood-genius co-founder is good PR
”
But while there’s plenty of enthusiasm plus the obligatory defence sector TLAs (three-letter acronyms),
this pillar faces its own headwinds
: broad priorities, vague funding, bureaucratic delays, lingering export controls, IP spats, and beyond.
Anyway, Pillar II is basically seeking a free-world answer to China’s civil-military fusion: ie, copying the outcome (rapid flow of capital and tech into military modernisation), but getting there with incentives and competition rather than state coercion.
And whereas those Pillar One subs will take decades,
some
of this Pillar II tech is already coming online. Only history will tell whether that’s enough.
That’s the final instalment of our special series on AUKUS. Did you miss parts one and two? They’re available
here
and
here
.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇧🇬
BULGARIA — New year, new notes.
Bulgaria has become the 21st country to adopt the euro, nearly 20 years after the Black Sea nation first joined the EU. (
Euronews
)
Comment:
While ECB chief Christine Lagarde has hailed the move as a demonstration of the bloc’s “shared values and collective strength”, folks inside Bulgaria are divided: backers hope it’ll help boost the EU’s poorest economy and push back against Russian influence; critics worry about inflation, and argue Bulgarians should’ve been consulted via a referendum first.
🇫🇮
FINLAND — Ship seized.
Finnish authorities have seized a Russian cargo ship over the latest “
aggravated sabotage
” of an undersea cable connecting Estonia and Finland. (
Politico
)
Comment
: We wrote about these suspiciously frequent Baltic incidents
here
.
🇧🇴
BOLIVIA — Dynamite.
A week on, miners (backed by teacher unions) continue to protest against new business-friendly president Rodrigo Paz and his plan to end costly fuel subsidies. (
AP
)
Comment:
Paz is also relatively US-friendly, welcoming the first American ambassador to Bolivia in 17 years.
🇹🇭
THAILAND — Freed soldiers.
Thailand has released 18 Cambodian soldiers held since last July as part of a new ceasefire deal. In this latest iteration of their
border spat
, 20 days of clashes left at least 101 people dead and more than half a million displaced. (
Reuters
)
🇾🇪
YEMEN
— Cancelled, delayed, late.
UAE-backed separatists have shut Aden airport in defiance of Yemen’s Saudi-backed internationally-recognised government. (
Haaretz
)
Comment:
It’s all part of the UAE-Saudi rivalry now playing out in Yemen — we recently explored the background
here
.
🇻🇪
VENEZUELA
— Drones on the doorstep?
The US has sanctioned a Venezuelan state aerospace company accused of assembling Iranian combat drones, citing "
reckless proliferation of deadly weapons.
" A photo has since emerged appearing to show a Mohajer-6 drone operational at a Venezuelan air base. The drones can surveil and strike, and Venezuela is also reportedly developing a Shahed-136 clone with enough range to reach Puerto Rico. (
Reuters
/
The War Zone
)
Comment:
The Iran-Venezuela defence relationship dates back nearly two decades, but the real US interest here is to prevent the risk to US military assets as the Trump administration continues to try and force Maduro out.
🇮🇷
IRAN — To the streets, again.
We flagged the developing Iranian protests on Tuesday—they've now spread to smaller cities in Iran's west, with at least six killed after security forces opened fire on crowds. The regime has appointed a new central bank governor and declared a mid-week "
cold weather
" holiday to try and slow the protest momentum. (
NYT
$)
Comment:
Iranian state media is spinning like crazy: Tehran Times blames "Western and Israeli actors" for hijacking "peaceful protests", while IRGC-affiliated Fars News warns of "infiltrators" turning economic grievances political. These are the largest protests since the 2022 Mahsa Amini unrest—worth watching carefully, with President Trump now
warning
the US will act if the regime (again) kills protestors.
🇨🇭
SWITZERLAND — Death roll rises.
Neighbouring Italy says the death toll from the devastating New Years Eve bar fire in the Swiss Alps has now reached 47. Authorities are still investigating the cause, with sparklers and soundproofing foam seen as possible factors. (
Al Jazeera
)