URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/special-edition-aukus-1-of-3
Title: 🌍 Special edition: AUKUS (1 of 3)

Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. I’m going to go ahead and picture you absolutely gorging on festive leftovers right now, or maybe roasting chestnuts by an open fire, or maybe sniffing unwooded chardonnay in a soft-knit turtleneck beneath a Christmas tree, or maybe hugging a reindeer, or tossing a crustacean on a grill.
And while you absolutely go to town on that, dear Intriguer, I wanted to help you ease out the year by sliding into your DMs with (ahem) the first in a three-part series on
nuclear subs
.
Enjoy!
But first… number of the day
Two
That’s how many ISIS camps in northwest Nigeria the US reportedly targeted with Tomahawk missiles on Christmas Day, in a joint operation
announced
by President Trump. We
explored
Nigeria’s security situation just last month.
They went nuclear
AUKUS has continued across party lines since the big
🇬🇧
Johnson-
🇦🇺
Morrison-
🇺🇸
Biden reveal
Intriguers will know our spooked world is now scrambling for new ways to feel secure.
The result is bits of ‘
security architecture
’ (deals, treaties, pledges) popping up like mushrooms after rain. Those pacts aren’t just realigning our ties, but also ushering in a new era of massive government spending across multiple sectors.
So it makes sense to understand those mushrooms!
One of the most intriguing is the Australia-UK-US defence tech pact known as
AUKUS
, realistically (if not openly) designed to counter an increasingly assertive China — think Taiwan threats, vast claims across the South China Sea, and historic military ramp-up.
These three allies are already tight — they are (with Canada and New Zealand) part of the ‘
Five Eyes’ intel network
, for example. But AUKUS, dropped via a shock September announcement in 2021, aims to level that up in two main ways (known sexily as ‘pillars’):
The
first
involves the US and UK helping Australia get nuclear-
powered
(not armed)
subs
, and
The
second
is effectively an ‘
other
’ basket of defence tech, pledging to work together under the waves, on quantum, AI, cyber, hypersonics, and beyond.
🇦🇺
Albanese,
🇺🇸
Biden, and
🇬🇧
Sunak revealed more AUKUS details in March 2023
But… why
AUKUS
?
While the North Atlantic has NATO, there’s nothing similar in the Indo-Pacific — sure, there’s now a defence love triangle between China, Russia, and North Korea, but the mere idea of an Asian NATO is enough to rattle those (like China) who’d be on the outer.
So instead, there are the various US alliances (
🇯🇵
,
🇰🇷
,
🇵🇭
), plus the low-profile Five Power Defence Arrangements (
🇬🇧
,
🇦🇺
,
🇳🇿
,
🇲🇾
,
🇸🇬
), and looser groups like the Quad (
🇺🇸
,
🇦🇺
,
🇯🇵
,
🇮🇳
). It’s all a little like having too many WhatsApp groups and forgetting who’s in which one.
“
Bits of ‘security architecture’ (deals, treaties, pledges) are popping up like mushrooms after rain.
”
And while Australia, the UK, and the US are tight, they each have their own AUKUS aims.
For the US
, AUKUS is…
a force-multiplier that helps sustain a favourable
balance
of power in Asia
an
investment
(including Australian dollaridoos) in reviving US shipbuilding, and
part of a broader ‘
latticework
’ to tie US allies closer in countering China.
For the UK
, AUKUS is…
a big step in its vaunted ‘
tilt
’ to defend Indo-Pacific trade, security, and values
an
investment
(including Australian dollaridoos) in UK shipbuilding, and
that in turn bolsters its
posture
against Europe’s most immediate threat (Russia).
Amid allied doubts, Trump reiterated his AUKUS support during Albanese’s October visit
And for Australia
, AUKUS means…
a big
step up
in its own defence capabilities
more
access
to allied defence tech, investment, and procurement, and
a clearer
signal
of its resolve and alliances after a decade of wobbly ties with China.
The common — if unstated — thread linking each of these allies through AUKUS is China.
So in our
next special edition
(hitting inboxes on Tuesday December 30th), we’ll look at how that’s shaping strategy in the region, and some of the big AUKUS challenges ahead.
Until then, enjoy your leftovers / chestnuts / chardonnay / turtlenecks / reindeer hugs / crustaceans.