URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/sudans-new-low
Title: 🌍 Sudan’s new low

Today’s briefing:
— Sudan’s new low
— Davos in the desert
— Best-worst Halloween outfit
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Happy Halloween, dear Intriguers. Whether your celebratory vibe is the traditional costume + trick or treat, Samhain (the ancient Celtic festival), All Saints’ Day (from many European countries), the Día de los Muertos (or Day of the Dead from Mexico), or Pangangaluluwa (from the Philippines), we hope it’s fun.
On a more sombre note, today’s edition focuses on
the worsening situation in Sudan
, which truly is a modern day horror story. Let’s take a look.
Quote of the day
“There were strongly differing views”
That’s how Fed chair Jerome Powell (announcing this week’s quarter-point rate cut) described his board’s internal divisions, triggering market jitters on whether US easing will continue.
Atrocious
As we foreshadowed, Sudan’s notorious ‘Rapid Support Forces’ (
RSF
) militia is now TikToking footage of itself committing atrocities in Darfur’s city of El Fasher.
Recap
: the RSF technically formed in 2013, but was really a re-brand of the notorious ‘Janjaweed’ used by Sudan’s Islamist ex-dictator (
al-Bashir
) against Darfur in the 2000s.
By the time a popular uprising ousted Bashir in 2019, the army and RSF were frenemies, jointly toppling Sudan’s transitional authority then signing
an uneasy power-sharing pact
.
But that imploded spectacularly in 2023, triggering a civil war that’s now left ~150,000 dead, 12 million (a ~Belgium) displaced, and 30 million (an ~Australia) needing aid.
And that’s where Darfur’s
El Fasher
city comes in — it was the military’s last Darfur stronghold, so the RSF started a siege there 18 months ago with a 50km sand wall.
That siege broke on Sunday, and
the RSF is now inside the wire
, resuming the ethnic cleansing it’s been perpetrating for a quarter-century. And don’t take our word for it — RSF members themselves are boasting about it online, with one guy alone (Brigadier-General Al-Fatih Abdallah
Idris
) gleefully shooting multiple civilians at a time.
The victims?
El Fasher is now (like the RSF and broader Sudan) overwhelmingly Muslim — the city’s last Christian pastor reportedly fled last month, and the last Catholic priest was shot dead in June. So the massacres are now more along ethnic lines, with the Arab-majority RSF targeting local African ethnicities like Fur, Zaghawa, and Masalit.
Again, don’t take our word for it:
psychos like Idris
above literally film themselves asking civilians their tribal affiliation before shooting them. His RSF colleagues even went and massacred
several hundred more
locals at two hospitals this week. The scale of death in El Fasher is so big, Yale researchers have even shown you can literally
see it from space
.
So what’s the world doing about this?
The RSF leader (‘
Hemedti
’) says he’s opened an investigation, which is weird because he said the same thing back in August when Idris was already filming his own atrocities. That investigation should’ve taken Hemedti about 30 seconds to fire up his TikTok account and look with his own eyes, and yet there was Idris still at it this week.
So you’ll forgive our cynicism when we mention Hemedti just released footage purporting to show
Idris being taken to jail
.
Meanwhile,
the UN
Security Council
extended
its arms embargo on Sudan just last month, and yesterday
reiterated
it won’t recognise the RSF’s parallel regime. The UN’s main humanitarian arm (OCHA) also launched
a $6B appeal
back in February, and guess how that appeal is now tracking? It’s barely at 25%.
The US
hosted indirect talks with both sides (ie, never in the same room) in DC last week in hopes of progressing to formal ceasefire negotiations, but the two sides are way apart.
And those negotiations are meant to be backed by an international ‘
Quartet
’ (the US, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and the UAE), but you’ll forgive our cynicism on that front, too: there’s evidence (denied of course) that the UAE has been supplying the RSF with arms (including Chinese drones) in hopes of securing influence over vast Sudanese terrain that’s rich in…
gold
(historically exported through Dubai)
agriculture
(the UAE has ~none), and
strategic value
(right on the Red Sea).
Meanwhile, Egypt and others (like Turkey and Pakistan) have sided with Sudan’s military, who it must be said aren’t exactly saints either.
Intrigue’s Take
There’s an old cartoon where someone gets to the pearly gates and asks God why he didn’t stop all the suffering, and God replies: “
I was going to ask you the same thing
”.
There’s no law of physics preventing us from stopping the above atrocities, or any others. It’s really just a law of human will, which gets us to the ‘
Problem from Hell
’ chronicled by a
Pulitzer-winner
who later became a US ambassador: it’s about mankind’s tendency towards depravity, coupled with the (US-led) world’s tendency towards inaction.
The above book focuses particularly on US inaction, not necessarily because the US has been uniquely inactive, but more because the US has had uniquely global reach. But as we’ve been charting for a while now, that US-backed world order is now on the defensive, retreating more towards a world where each major power dominates its own region.
And sorry to be such Debbie Downers on a Friday, but history suggests the result might be a world prone to even more human depravity, and even more international inaction.
Sound even smarter:
There’ve been 35
coups
and attempted coups since Sudan’s 1956 independence.
There are long-standing
International Criminal Court
warrants out for former dictator al-Bashir (81) on genocide and other charges. Sudan’s military is still holding him at a medical facility in the country’s north.
Earlier this month, the ICC
convicted
one of al-Bashir’s Janjaweed (RSF’s predecessor) commanders over his role in the Darfur scorched-earth campaign that left
hundreds of thousands
dead two decades ago.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇰🇷
SOUTH KOREA - It’s a wrap.
This year’s Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) summit is set to conclude on Saturday, with mixed reports on whether the bloc’s 21 members can still agree on a joint statement. The summit has largely been overshadowed by yesterday’s Xi-Trump chat, which produced more of a trade truce than any definitive deal. (
DW
)
Comment
: Xi Jinping’s efforts to position himself as Asia’s reliable trade partner will have enjoyed a symbolic boost by President Trump’s early departure. Xi meets Korea’s Lee and Japan’s Takaichi later today (Friday).
🇸🇦
SAUDI ARABIA - Davos in the desert.
The Saudis just wrapped their annual flagship
Future Investment Initiative
(FII) conference in the Riyadh Ritz Carlton (the same hotel where the crown prince famously imprisoned his rivals during his big purge from 2017). (
Bloomberg
$)
Comment:
In amongst the rooftop parties, desert compound soirees, and Wall St mixers, the two FII messages this year were i) any Saudi pariah status is long gone — attendees included the heads of Goldman, JP Morgan, Snap, Dow, Delta, Siemens et al, and that was the dream audience for… ii) Syria’s al-Sharaa, who reiterated his pleas (with the Saudi crown prince in the front row) that Syria is
open for business
.
🇦🇫
AFGHANISTAN - We still good?
After their Istanbul talks collapsed on Wednesday, Pakistan and Afghanistan have now agreed to extend their ceasefire for another week. While ironing out details on how to monitor any peace, the core sticking point is still the Taliban’s denial that it’s harbouring TTP Islamists who’ve resumed attacks on Pakistan lately. (
Al Jazeera
)
🇰🇪
KENYA
-
Partner up.
The French ambassador to Nairobi has signed a landmark defence cooperation pact with Kenya’s defence ministry. (
Government of Kenya
)
Comment:
Why? The Kenyans want help countering Al-Shabaab next door in Somalia, a goal they share with France, which is itself trying to a) rebuild its shrinking presence elsewhere on the continent, b) protect its presence in the Indian Ocean, and c) boost arms sales.
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
- A new record?
The senate has now adjourned as the US government shutdown enters its 31st day. The lawmakers will return on Monday, just a day before the shutdown equals the 2018-19 all-time record of 35 days. (
CBS
)
Comment:
The fact this isn’t completely dominating headlines like last time is a pretty good indicator of how much more volatile our world has become since 2019.
🇨🇺
CUBA - In times like these.
US Secretary of State Marco Rubio has confirmed DC is prepared to send humanitarian aid to Cuba after Hurricane Melissa, in a slight departure from traditionally frosty US-Cuba ties. (
Politico
)
Comment
: We looked at the
geopolitics of Hurricane Melissa
earlier this week, and wondered how this might shape the immediate US disaster response. It comes the same week the UN General Assembly overwhelmingly passed its annual non-binding resolution calling on the US to ease its restrictions on Cuba. Interestingly, the US attempted a full-court-press against that resolution this year, slightly shaving support from 187 to 165 countries.
🇹🇿
TANZANIA - Election curfew.
Authorities have imposed a curfew in the commercial capital of Dar es Salaam amid violent protests, as Samia Suluhu Hassan cruises to re-election.
(
France24
)
Comment
: It helps that her rival is in jail on spurious treason charges — even her own party’s ex-spokesperson (and former ambassador to Cuba) is now missing after criticising her
.
Extra Intrigue
Intrigue’s weekend recommendations 📚
Look
at these adorable
cats wandering
around parts of the former Ottoman Empire’s Topkapi Palace in Istanbul, after authorities restored an original cat door.
Read
this piece
by a former special assistant to a US president reflecting on the plausibility of
A House of Dynamite
, the taut new White House thriller set in the minutes after someone launches a nuke at the US. And speaking of plausibility…
Listen
to Intrigue co-founder Helen’s
cameo
(from ~2hrs:10min) on Australian radio, explaining why hit show
The Diplomat
is more
authentic
than accurate (if it were accurate, nobody would watch!).
Outfit of the day
Diplomats are right up there with pilots, surgeons, and founders when it comes to casually but reliably always somehow slipping their profession right into conversation.
By the way, did we mention we used to be diplomats but are now founders?
Friday quiz
Test your knowledge of this week’s news!
1) A start-up in which country just launched the first locally-denominated stablecoin?
China
Japan
South Korea
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) Which famous figure recently revised their climate stance?
Greta Thunberg
Bill Gates
Jeff Bezos
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) How old is Paul Biya, the world's oldest sitting leader?
82
87
92
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate