URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/sudans-ruling-generals-battle
Title: 🌍 Sudan's ruling generals battle each other

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Last week we offered you some cool gift ideas from world leaders, who’ve received everything from dogs and iPads, through to a bulletproof limo. But our Irish friends took things up a notch on Friday and decided to give US President Joe Biden a
200-year-old brick
. It’s the thought that counts, right?
🗽
Less than 36 hours until Team Intrigue touches down in NYC. With only a few spots left for our Wednesday night happy hour, be sure to shoot
aine@internationalintrigue.io
a message if you’re keen to join!
Today’s briefing is a 4.7 min read:
🇸🇩
Rival generals battle for control of
Sudan
.
🇰🇵
North Korea
’s new solid fuel missiles worry the world.
➕
Plus:
The global arms trade, how the papers are covering the possible poisoning of a jailed Putin critic, and some rather ridiculous news headlines to get you charging into your Monday.
🎧
Today’s Intrigue Outloud:
Go deeper into Germany’s decision to switch off its last nuclear reactor, and North Korea’s decision to double down on nuclear.
Listen here!
🗺️ AROUND THE WORLD
🇰🇷
South Korea
: Japanese and South Korean officials will meet in Seoul today (Monday) for the
first bilateral security summit
since 2018. Despite their adversarial history, the two increasingly see opportunities to cooperate on regional security issues (such as China’s growing heft).
🇫🇷
France
: A court
upheld the government’s plan
to raise France’s retirement age from 62 to 64 on Friday. Streets surrounding the court were barricaded ahead of the decision, as protests against the plan continued across the country.
🇱🇦
Laos
: A 1,000 kilometre rail line between Laos and southern China
began cross-border passenger services
for the first time last week. The China-led project is part of Beijing's massive Belt and Road Initiative.
🇵🇪
Peru
: A former presidential candidate and army general has been
jailed for 12 years
over his role in the 1988 murder of a journalist, who was covering human rights abuses during Peru’s civil conflict.
🇬🇭
Ghana
: In a world first, Oxford University’s malaria vaccine has been
approved for use in Ghana
. Oxford’s partners built a factory in Ghana’s capital, Accra, that can produce up to 200 million doses per year.
🇸🇩
SUDAN | MILITARY CLASHES
RSF chief ‘Hemeti’ (L) and military chief al-Burhan (R) don’t get along
Sudan’s rival generals battle for control
Briefly:
Africa's third largest country plunged into chaos over the weekend as rival generals
fought for control
of key strategic sites across the country.
The backstory here is more complicated than a Christopher Nolan film
, but in short, dictator Omar al-Bashir ran Sudan for 30 years until jubilant mass protests led to a 2019 coup that ousted him.
Following another coup in 2021, two generals ran Sudan jointly: the country’s military chief was leader, while a powerful warlord (head of the Rapid Support Forces, or RSF) was deputy. The plan was to return Sudan to civilian rule this month, but the two generals couldn’t agree on how to incorporate the RSF into Sudan’s military.
And those tensions boiled over into military clashes this weekend, leaving dozens of civilians dead in the capital Khartoum and across Sudan. Despite a brief humanitarian pause on Sunday, the rival factions vow they’ll fight to the end.
Intrigue’s take:
The one thing potentially worse than a brutal dictator is the anarchy that can emerge after they’re gone. Here, however, the power struggle between rival generals doesn’t necessarily reflect broader divisions across Sudan, where
support for a path to democracy remains high
.
But there’s a geopolitical angle here too: external powers have long been drawn to Sudan’s resources and strategic location. And this time around, Egypt is close to Sudan’s military, while the Saudis and Russians prefer the RSF. If these external players try to help their preferred general prevail, things could get even messier.
Also worth noting:
In February, Sudan's military
endorsed a proposed Russian naval base
which would grant Russia a foothold on the Red Sea (home to 30% of global container trade). The RSF had already endorsed the proposal.
The ICC issued
two arrest warrants for former dictator Bashir
in 2009 and 2010 over alleged war crimes in Darfur. He’s still serving a jail term in Sudan for corruption after $130M in cash was found in his home.
📰
GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES
How different newspapers covered
: The rapidly declining health of Russian opposition figure Alexei Navalny, who is currently held in a Russian prison.
Links
:
NYT
,
ABC
,
People’s Gazette
.
Today’s briefing is sponsored by
Babbel
Meet new people and explore the world with Babbel.
Going on vacation is great, but exploring the world like a local is even better. Not speaking the language is no longer an excuse:
With Babbel, you can learn to speak a new language in just three weeks.
The language learning platform offers 10-minute lessons designed by real language experts, focused on conversational skills in 14 languages. Subscribers also have access to accent-perfecting speech recognition technology, live online classes, games, and more to help you build confidence before you board your flight.
Sign up today to get up to 60 percent off your subscription.
🇰🇵
NORTH KOREA | WEAPONS
Credits: NASA & Reuters
North Korea tests a key new missile type
Briefly:
North Korea says it tested its
”most powerful” missile to date
last Thursday, a claim substantiated by South Korean sources. The launch, which caused Japan to issue a brief evacuation order, likely involved a solid-fuel intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM).
Solid-fuel missiles
are easier to store, quicker to deploy and need less logistical support, making them harder to detect. This means they can
maintain a high state of readiness, with the potential to launch within minutes rather than hours
.
Intrigue’s take:
The world already knew North Korean leader Kim Jong-un was working to build a solid-fuel ICBM: he rocket-teased us in
December
and
February
. But few observers expected to see a successful test launch so soon.
Leaked US intel
this month suggests Kim may be overstating his weapons capabilities a little. But he’s clearly still making headway. And that gives him more leverage abroad, while helping him cling to power at home.
Also worth noting:
Thursday’s missile launch comes shortly after the US and South Korea completed their
biggest military drills in 5 years
.
North Korea is one of the poorest countries in the world, but commits around a
quarter of its GDP to military spending
.
👀
EXTRA INTRIGUE
It wouldn’t be an Intrigue Monday without a roundup of the world’s more ridiculous news.
In the US, Arnold Schwarzenegger
accidentally filled in an active service trench
he thought was a pothole.
In the UK, a man was spotted
walking a seagull on a leash
.
In Argentina, a mother asked forensic police to
fingerprint her identical twins
to figure out who’s who.
Back in the UK again, a performance of
The Bodyguard
musical was halted
when rowdy fans wouldn’t stop singing along to
I Will Always Love You
.
And in Spain, an extreme athlete who lived in an underground cave for 500 days said
she didn’t want to come out
.
📊
CHART OF THE DAY
Credits: SIPRI
According to
new data
from the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, America’s
share of global arms exports
grew from 33% to 40%  between 2013-17 and 2018-22, while Russia’s share fell by six percentage points to 16% over the same period.
🗳️ POLL TIME!
How do you think the West should approach North Korea and its advancing weapons program?
💰 More sanctions
🎤 Negotiations should be resumed
✋ Nothing, the current approach is fine
🇨🇳 Pressure China to take more action
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Thursday’s poll:
Do you think the economic costs of geopolitical fragmentation are worth the gains?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
⛓️ Yes, decoupling from unfriendly countries must be a priority (58%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️
🔫
No, it's like shooting yourself in the foot (39%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 🖋️ Other (write in!)  (3%)
Your two cents:
🔫
C.C:
“It's just inevitable, unlike Thanos.”
🖋️
E.H:
“The difficult thing is that a lot depends on what type of economic position you're in - for the economically fragile third-world country I come from, I must admit that money and the suffering its loss causes is front in my mind. I'm all for ethical geopolitical decisions, but the thought of hungry neighbours might matter more.”