URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/syrias-nearly-back-fold
Title: 🌍 Syria's (nearly) back in the fold

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Our word of the day is ‘slowbalisation’: the slowing down of globalisation and everything it entails. Incidentally, the runners-up were ‘typerventilate’ (bashing out texts in quick succession) and ‘unlighten’ (learning something that somehow leaves you dumber). Not that you’ll need that last one while reading International Intrigue
😉
.
Today’s briefing is a 4.1 min read:
🇸🇾
Syria
isn’t a pariah state anymore.
💾
New
spyware
captures the world’s attention.
➕
Plus:
Exploring the world from your laptop, how the papers are covering North Korea cutting contact with South Korea, and a quiz on rivers (because why not).
🎧
Today’s Intrigue Outloud:
Go deeper on global demographic challenges and opportunities with
London Business School
professor, Andrew J Scott.
Listen here!
🗺️ AROUND THE WORLD
🇹🇼
Taiwan
: Taiwan’s ruling party has selected Vice President William Lai as its
candidate for next year’s presidential elections
. Lai’s nomination is likely to anger China due to his outspoken stance on Taiwanese independence.
🇮🇹
Italy
: Rome has declared a
six-month state of emergency
over a spike in migrant arrivals via the Mediterranean. Maritime authorities conducted sea rescue operations for more than 3,000 people over the Easter weekend.
🇹🇭
Thailand
: Apple is reportedly in talks to move part of its
MacBook production to Thailand
as it diversifies away from China. Thailand may seek to follow the example of India, which now accounts for 7% of Apple’s total iPhone production.
🇺🇸
United States
:
The FBI has arrested
a 21-year-old national guardsman in connection with the recent online leak of highly classified US intelligence. As we
foreshadowed
, initial media reports suggest the suspect, Jack Teixeira, may have been motivated by bravado.
🇧🇭
Bahrain
: After six years of deep freeze, Bahrain and Qatar have announced they’ll
resume diplomatic ties
. The two countries have had a long-running rivalry with disputes over borders, fishing, and allegations of Qatar becoming too close to Iran.
🇸🇾
SYRIA | GEOPOLITICS
Syrian President Bashar al-Assad is walking straight back into the Arab League.
Syria’s return to the Arab fold is almost complete
Briefly:
Today (Friday), foreign ministers from Arab League countries are meeting in Saudi Arabia to
discuss Syria’s return
to the regional organisation, more than a decade after its membership was suspended.
Some context:
Syrian president Bashar al-Assad became an international pariah after his crackdown on a popular uprising turned civil war that broke out in 2011. Several countries in the region even sent cash and arms to support Assad’s opponents.
But February’s devastating earthquake opened the door to re-engagement:
Syria’s neighbours sent planeloads of aid, and the foreign ministers of the UAE, Jordan, and Egypt quickly visited in person
Assad then made rare visits to the UAE, Oman and Egypt
And Tunisia and Saudi Arabia formally restored ties with Syria this week
Intrigue’s take:
After years of getting fewer invites than a jazz bassoonist, Assad’s calendar is now filling up. But given his track record, not everyone’s on board. Qatar has said dealing with him would be a
“betrayal”
of his regime’s victims, a view echoed by others like Yemen, Kuwait and Morocco.
Still, ten years on, it’s now pretty clear Assad isn’t going anywhere. And that leaves his neighbours with a choice: deal with the world as it is, or as it ought to be. It seems most of Syria’s neighbours are now going with option A.
Also worth noting:
A decade of civil war has left over
300,000 Syrians dead
, with the Assad regime accused of carrying out several war crimes.
Aides to US President Biden say
the US doesn’t support the region’s normalising
of ties with Syria, but isn’t opposing it either.
📰
GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES
How different newspapers covered
: North Korea’s decision to cut communication links with South Korea.
Links
:
Korea Times
,
SCMP
,
Bloomberg
.
Today’s briefing is sponsored by
Policyware
Become an expert by learning from one, and even get your job to pay for it.
Gustafsson-Wright’s previous professional experience includes working at the World Bank, the UNICEF Innocenti Research Center, and as Senior Researcher with the Amsterdam Institute for International Development (AIID).
In this course, you can learn at your own pace with both live and recorded lecture options.
Courses are eligible for corporate reimbursement!
Sign up here
💾
ISRAEL | TECH
QuaDream’s ‘Reign’ software seems like Pegasus by any other name.
New spyware is picking up where Pegasus left off
Briefly:
Multiple governments have purchased advanced spyware from Israel-based QuaDream, according to a
new report
from Microsoft and Citizen Lab. QuaDream’s proprietary product, Reign, is a “zero-click” software that allows users to hack iPhones without any action from the target.
QuaDream was founded by former employees of the now-notorious NSO Group, whose Pegasus spyware was a favourite for governments all over the world. Some clients deployed Pegasus to
support law enforcement
; most didn’t.
For example, NSO clients targeted dozens of Mexican journalists with the spyware, and in one case, hitmen used Pegasus to geo-locate and
assassinate an anti-corruption reporter
. By 2021, the US had blacklisted NSO, and last month it blocked US agencies from using spyware as a law enforcement tool.
Intrigue’s take:
Be honest: if you were offered Reign’s power of omniscience (for the low price of around
$2.2M per year
), would you take it? It seems plenty of folks out there are answering yes, and not all of them are as benevolent as you.
So, if this spyware is both objectionable and yet irresistible, then Big Tech might be our best hope: staying ahead of spyware to render it obsolete. Otherwise, there’s not much stopping Reign from reigning supreme.
Also worth noting:
Apple says
it’s aware of spyware like Reign and has hardened its security protections.
Clients in Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Hungary, Ghana, Israel, Mexico, Romania, Singapore, the UAE and Uzbekistan have all
allegedly purchased
Reign.
👀
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Here are some recommendations from Team Intrigue to get you back-flipping into your weekend. If you have:
5 mins:
Read / watch the Washington Post’s
pretty remarkable interview
with a teen who was in the infamous group chat where highly classified US intelligence first leaked.
20 mins:
Listen to
this episode
of ‘Asia Geopolitics’, discussing the risks of the new AUKUS nuclear-propelled submarine plan.
90 mins:
Espionage isn’t always grim and scary. If you have a bit more time, check out
Burn After Reading
to see the lighter side of spycraft.
🗺️
MAP OF THE DAY
Credits: Netlify.
Where in the world has Google Street View gone?
There’s no better way to see the world than from the comfort of your couch, but some places are
easier mapped
than others. Google Street View isn’t available in
Germany
or
China
, and hasn’t managed to traverse much of Africa. As for all that space over Australia’s Outback? There just aren’t that many streets out there.
🗳️ QUIZ TIME!
This week’s Intrigue quiz is on rivers. Dive in!
1) The Danube crosses more countries than any river in the world. How many does it cross?
a) 6
b) 10
c) 13
d) 7
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) Which of the following two rivers flow South to North?
a) Paraguay River
b) Lena River
c) Mekong River
d) Nile
e) Indus River
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) Which of the following are real rivers?
a) Parsnip river
b) Duckabush river
c) Banana river
d) Rabbit river
e) All of the above
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Answers: 1-b, 2-b&d, 3-e.