URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/tensions-flare-kosovo-serbia
Title: 🌍 Tensions flare up between Kosovo and Serbia

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
A suspected
Russian spy whale
has reappeared off the coast of Sweden. And this isn’t the first time animals have gone all
007
on us. In 2011, the Saudis captured a
GPS-equipped vulture
they suspected was working for Israeli intelligence, while the US Navy has a
marine mammal program
with dolphins and sea lions.
Today’s briefing is a 4.4 min read:
🇽🇰
Clashes between
NATO
peacekeepers and protesters in
Kosovo
.
🇹🇭
Thailand
’s new coalition is on shaky ground.
➕
Plus:
The Caribbean country that never was, how the papers are covering a regional summit in Brazil, and why ‘Beijing’ is trending on Twitter in the Maldives.
🎧
Today’s Intrigue Outloud:
Why is Poland so interested in Russian interference?
Listen here!
🗺️ AROUND THE WORLD
🇨🇳
China
: US officials say China has
turned down a much-anticipated meeting
between the two countries’ defence ministers in Singapore later this week. Chinese Defence Minister Li Shangfu is currently under US sanctions.
🇪🇸
Spain
: Prime Minister Pedro Sánchez
called for snap elections
on Monday, after his party’s dire performance in local ballots the day prior. General elections will now be held in July rather than at the end of the year.
🇮🇳
India
: Delhi has filed a
criminal complaint
against British defence firms Rolls-Royce and BAE Systems, accusing them of engaging in corrupt practices in India’s purchase of over 100 training jets.
🇸🇻
El Salvador
: Former President Mauricio Funes has been
sentenced (in absentia) to 14 years in prison
for negotiating with gangs to establish a truce in 2012. Current President Nayib Bukele, who’s led a crackdown on gangs, has also been accused of negotiating with them.
🇺🇬
Uganda
: The US has said it’s considering imposing sanctions and visa restrictions after Uganda implemented one of the
world’s toughest anti-gay laws
on Monday. The new law includes penalties such as life imprisonment and capital punishment.
🇽🇰
KOSOVO | GEOPOLITICS
Clashes between protesters and NATO peacekeepers leave dozens injured
Briefly:
At least 30 NATO peacekeepers and just as many civilians have been injured in clashes involving ethnic Serbian protesters in North Kosovo. The protesters were gathered outside a municipal building to demonstrate against new ethnic Albanian mayors, who were elected in a disputed vote in April.
While Kosovo is inhabited primarily by ethnic Albanians
, its northern region is home to a Serbian majority. And long-simmering ethnic tensions there came to a head last week. Local Serbs are accusing Kosovo of:
Reneging on its promise to grant them more autonomy, and
Stoking tensions by backing ethnic Albanian mayors who were elected in polls that the Serbs had boycotted (voter turnout was <4%).
For its part, Kosovo has accused neighbouring Serbia of stirring the pot and supporting violent protesters.
Last Friday’s violence was the worst flare-up in a decade.
Serbian President Aleksandar Vučić spent the night with Serbian troops near the Kosovo border and placed the army at its highest state of alert. Meanwhile, NATO labelled the attacks against its peacekeeping mission
“totally unacceptable”
.
Intrigue’s take:
If you were to look up
‘“how to undo years of diplomatic efforts in a day”
, you might find a detailed account of Friday’s events.
The EU and US have been trying to foster the normalisation of Serbia-Kosovo relations for more than a decade, and things were finally
starting to look hopeful
just weeks ago. Aaand now it seems we’re back to square one.
Also worth noting:
Kosovo declared independence from Serbia in 2008, but Serbia won’t recognise it (neither will Russia, China nor five EU countries).
The
NATO Mission in Kosovo
was established in 1999 and has around 3,800 troops from 27 countries. It’s now sending an extra 700 troops.
The US has
announced measures
against Kosovo for its alleged refusal to heed advice and avoid stoking tensions in its Serb-majority north.
Serbian tennis star Novak Djokovic has been accused of aggravating the situation after he wrote that Kosovo was
"
the heart of Serbia
"
on a camera lens after his first-round victory at the French Open on Monday.
📰
GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES
How different newspapers covered
: The regional South American summit held on Tuesday by Brazilian President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva.
Links
:
Mercopress
,
Reuters
,
TeleSur
.
Today’s briefing is sponsored by
Hubspot
Don’t forget what you’re chasing.
Sure, job hunting gets boring and chore-like, but don’t forget what you’re chasing. The right fit will be glorious. And when searching online, you’re up against the world – best to put your best foot forward. Take 5 timeless cover letter templates that will help you showcase your most splendiferous skills. (Hopefully, land a great gig.)
Download here.
🇹🇭
THAILAND | POLITICS
Pita Limjaroenrat (L) of Move Forward, and Thaksin Shinawatra (R) who controls Pheu Thai.
A guest piece by Susannah Patton, The Lowy Institute.
Thailand’s winning coalition is already looking shaky
Briefly
: The winners of Thailand’s recent elections are already mired in bickering and infighting. This suggests that, after nearly a decade of military rule, the road to forming a stable and democratic government might be even bumpier than expected.
The two winning parties,
Move Forward
and
Pheu Thai
, need to stick together if they want to form a government without relying on conservative parties from the outgoing administration.
But they’re now divided
on who gets the powerful role of the house speaker. And this bodes poorly for their ability to cooperate, which could increase the risk that
Move Forward
’s Pita Limjaroenrat fails to become prime minister, despite winning the most seats.
Susannah Patton’s take:
Exiled former prime minister Thaksin Shinawatra still controls the
Pheu Thai
party, and his decision will be key. He could ditch the upstart
Move Forward
party and form a coalition with military-aligned parties, but the risk is he’d never win another election again – these parties are deeply unpopular.
Also worth noting:
Thailand’s constitution allows a lengthy delay of up to three months between the election and the new government forming, leaving plenty of time for the country’s
powerful conservative forces
to undermine the election results.
Intrigue’s note
: Susannah previously served as a diplomat in Thailand and is one of our favourite gurus on Southeast Asia. To get her latest insights on the region, be sure to follow Susannah on
Twitter
, and check out some of her
work
at The Lowy Institute.
👀
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Here’s what’s been
trending on Twitter
around the world:
#AGRIFISH
is trending in
🇧🇪
Belgium
due to the EU Agriculture and Fisheries Council meeting that took place yesterday (Tuesday).
Beijing
is trending in the
🇲🇻
Maldives
after Elon Musk landed in Beijing to meet the Chinese foreign minister.
Erdogan
is trending in
🇹🇳
Tunisia
after his victory in Sunday’s Turkish elections.
📜
THIS DAY IN HISTORY
A stamp marking the founding of the West Indies Federation, featuring Queen Elizabeth
Did you know  there was almost a pan-Caribbean mega-state?
Back in 1958, a dozen British colonies (including Jamaica, Barbados, and Trinidad and Tobago) prepared for independence by forming the West Indies Federation, which lasted until this day in 1962, when political in-fighting led to its dissolution.
🗳️ POLL TIME!
What do you think is *the* defining feature of a world superpower?
🎖️ Military supremacy
💰 Economic supremacy
💻 Technological supremacy
🤝 Diplomatic clout
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Which infrastructure do you think is most vulnerable right now?
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️
🌊
Undersea cables (33%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🚀
Satellites (11%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🚢
Air / water ports  (11%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
💽
Data centres  (41%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!) (5%)
Your two cents:
💽
A.F:
“Data centres dictate and dominate our lives, yet both physical and technological protection(s) are comically lax. Look no further than a certain 20-year-old low-level military employee’s recent, low-barrier ability to share state secrets across Discord & beyond…”
🚢
K.F:
“Look at the damage to supply lines caused by just one ship getting stuck in the Suez Canal.”
✍️
R.G.F:
“Electrical grid”