URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/thailand-and-cambodia-exchange-fire-323c3d4ed18304ef
Title: 🌍 Thailand and Cambodia exchange fire

Today’s briefing:
— The family feud destabilising Asia
— Costlier than therapy
— Been paying attention this week?
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Helen’s in Shanghai this week, which has me all nostalgic and missing my favourite game from my years in one of the world’s great cities: type politically sensitive slang into WeChat and watch the censors disappear it in real-time.
On quiet days, I’d rope my Chinese colleagues in to test the latest politically-sensitive slang, timing how long each lasted before deletion. Most disappeared within seconds. But occasionally, gloriously, one would survive for days.
Look, being a diplomat isn’t all champagne and caviar, so you take your thrills where you can get them.
Anyhooo, speaking of Asia, today’s top story is about this latest
Thailand-Cambodia clash
.
Number of the day
$8.4B
That’s the value of the merger DC just approved between US entertainment giants Paramount and Skydance, shortly after Paramount paid $16M to settle a Trump lawsuit alleging bias during last year’s campaign.
Family feud
L: former Thai PM Thaksin Shinawatra, R: former Cambodian PM Hun Sen.
Here at Intrigue, Friday is for chiller stories to accompany you gently into the weekend.
So we
screamed into a cushion
when clashes erupted early yesterday (Thursday) near the
Ta Muan Thom temple
, a UNESCO World Heritage Site long controlled by Thailand but claimed by Cambodia. The fighting then spread along the border, with Thailand claiming Cambodia’s strikes killed at least 15, while Cambodia reported one casualty.
Of course, this isn’t out of the blue.
You’ll recall we gave the
full Hollywood treatment
to the bold backstory, featuring a bromance, border clashes, then a leaked-call-betrayal between the two families long running these ancient neighbours: Thailand’s Shinawatras, and Cambodia’s Huns. June’s leaked call cost the young Shinawatra her job!
The hostilities stem in part from festering border wounds left by former colonial power France, that now threaten to escalate into a wider conflict.
Which leads us to three reasons why this matters:
Tourism
Southeast Asia is a tourism powerhouse, and Thailand alone is a global top-ten destination. And that was
before
Parker Posey lost her lorazepam in the third season of White Lotus. Some 35 million folks visited last year, supporting one in five local jobs.
Another seven million holidayed next door in poorer Cambodia, where tourism makes up ~10% of the economy. Anyway, tourists don’t like wars. You’ll recall even
a wild cross-border scam
was enough to dent Thai tourism. So an economic hit feels inevitable.
Family feud
While there are real disputes at play, they’re complicated by the powerful dynasties shaping these two neighbours: the Huns in Phnom Penh and the Shinawatras in Bangkok.
Once ‘godbrothers’ and golf buddies, the two patriarchs are now sworn enemies after this latest spat. So a family relationship that was long a stabilising force in the region is now looking more like a curve-ball, with questions of ego, honour, and dynastic survival potentially shaping their choices (even with the Shinawatras now out of the top job).
A test for China
Also, China has become increasingly open about the world it seeks ahead: whether it’s ‘new’, ‘multipolar’, or ‘hegemon-free’, President Xi wants out of a US-led order.
And one way he pursues that end is by presenting China as
a viable alternative
: he’s largely succeeded on the
economic front
, with China now the top trading partner for 140 nations, including both Thailand and Cambodia.
But on the
political
side
? Xi’s record is still mixed: he helped broker a historic détente between Saudi and Iranian rivals in 2023, but those kinds of headlines have dried up. Why?
It partly reflects the regional
limits
of his own power, including China’s smaller security footprint abroad
It partly reflects Xi’s
interests
in any given conflict — he openly backed Pakistan over rival India, but wants leverage with both Thailand and Cambodia (China has closer ties with Cambodia, yet significant investments in Thailand)
It partly reflects his
priorities
— he still seems to value continued trade and investment flows over high-risk mediation efforts, and…
It also just partly reflects his
schtick
— seeking to contrast with the US, he tends to paint China as preferring not to interfere.
Hence China’s fairly muted reaction: there’ve been expressions of concern and offers to facilitate dialogue, but nothing to meaningfully shape
how this plays out next
.
Ditto, there’s not been much out of
the US
: Thailand is a major non-NATO ally that buys US hardware, but the US is also wary of spooking Cambodia further into China’s embrace. Plus it wouldn’t help that DC is in the process of tariffing them both (though there’s apparently a deal with Cambodia).
So how will this play out?
The gunfire appears to have cooled for now, and neither side can afford a full war. But here we are: the basic border dispute remains unresolved, shots have now been fired, loved ones are now being buried, while a family feud simmers.
Case in point?
Thailand’s Thaksin Shinawatra (the ex-PM and patriarch) just
tweeted
this:
“
Many countries are concerned about the conflict between Thailand and Cambodia, offering to help mediate. I thanked everyone but said I’d like to ask for some time.
Because we probably need to let the Thai military do their duty to teach Hun Sen a lesson about his cunning ways first.
”
And the acting Thai PM Phumtham just warned the conflict "
could escalate into a state of war
".
Good times.
Intrigue’s Take
The world is already going multipolar, so the question now is really to what degree, and on whose terms (if anyone’s). As that plays out, two things will happen:
As the traditional stabilising presence of a single dominant power (the US) fades, we’ll see more historical regional flashpoints flare through the cracks again, and
That single stabilising presence will be replaced by the
de
stabilising presence of multiple rivals, who’ll either get too involved while pursuing their own interests, or not involved enough for fear of jeopardising them.
This latest Thai-Cambodia spat feels to us like a sharp illustration of all the above. It’s also a reminder that when the establishment foists weak coalitions on a country (as has happened in Thailand for years now), you get unstable and malleable governments.
Sound even smarter:
The Thai-Cambodia border is now closed, both capitals have now downgraded their ties, and Bangkok is urging its citizens to get out of Cambodia.
Thailand appears to have used its US F-16s to hit targets in Cambodia.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
Yoink!
A single Anhui-based company (‘Gate of the Era’) has managed to smuggle $400M of advanced US-designed Nvidia B200 chips to data centres in China, after DC initially banned China sales of the much-slower H20 chip earlier this year. (
FT
$)
Comment:
It’s more evidence that Nvidia is both a)
wrong
to claim there’s no proof of its chips getting smuggled into China, but also b)
right
to claim that maybe US chip export controls aren’t the right move in this porous chip race. The article above has a banger quote from an end-user in China, noting chip supplies continue unchanged, meaning the only winners here are the middle-men.
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
Surprise!
In some
amusing
extraordinary scenes, President Trump and his own Fed appointee Jerome Powell have squabbled in front of the cameras during the first Fed visit by a sitting president in decades. Things got testy when Trump produced a paper from his jacket pocket as evidence of cost overruns, prompting a brusque dismissal from Powell, arguing the president was counting a Fed building built five years ago. (
CBS
)
Comment:
The president has openly mused about firing Powell given the banker’s refusal to cut rates, but Trump keeps stepping back from the brink — his advisors will have warned such a move would entail litigation while rocking markets that hold central bank independence as sacred. So the president might be hinting that this Fed construction delay could be legal “cause” for Powell’s dismissal. Whatever’s going on, there’s
an influential paper
on central bank independence, warning that even if Powell resists political pressure, the damage to the Fed might already be done.
🇫🇷
FRANCE
-
It’s time.
President Macron has announced he’ll recognise the State of Palestine at the UN in September, as part of France’s “
historic commitment to a just and lasting peace
”. That’d make France the ~148th country — and the first major Western power — to do so. Israel’s Netanyahu has condemned the move, arguing it rewards terror: “
the Palestinians do not seek a state alongside Israel; they seek a state instead of Israel.
”  (
President Macron
and
PM Netanyahu
on X)
Comment
: These announcements coincided with DC and Israel withdrawing from the protracted Hamas ceasefire talks, accusing the group of bad faith. Israeli media outlets suggest the withdrawal could be a coordinated move to pressure Hamas.
🇳🇵
NEPAL
-
World aid.
China’s aid chief has visited Kathmandu this week, pledging more investment into Himalayan infrastructure under China’s signature
Belt & Road Initiative
. (
SCMP
)
Comment:
Nepal — landlocked between rival giants China and India — was long considered India’s turf. But years of China’s infrastructure investment are now paying dividends — the most visible sign was Nepal’s new leader breaking tradition by visiting China (rather than India) on his first trip abroad earlier this year. Delhi has voiced concerns, but whining won’t win.
🇻🇳
VIETNAM
-
Arms deals.
Vietnam’s police ministry is set to purchase two Lockheed Martin choppers in a landmark security deal, and is also mulling C-130 military transports. (
Strait Times
)
Comment
: It’s been a decade since the US lifted an arms embargo on its former foe. So why now? Fierce regional competition means Vietnam is keener to diversify its arms supplies, while the US is keener to broaden its friends in countering China. We’re guessing parallel tariff talks will have nudged this deal over the line too.
🇵🇪
PERU
-
Mercury retrograde.
Authorities have seized a record 4-ton shipment of illegal mercury hidden in gravel bags bound for Bolivia, exposing a vast smuggling network enabling the Amazon’s illegal gold trade (which relies on toxic mercury processing). (
AP
)
🇧🇯
BENIN
-
Welcome, ambassador.
Benin has appointed American filmmaker Spike Lee and his producer-author wife Tonya Lewis Lee as cultural ambassadors to African-Americans in the US, hoping to increase tourism and diaspora ties with the Western African country. Benin launched
a website
last year offering citizenship to descendants of enslaved Africans, an opportunity reportedly taken up by Ms Lewis Lee. (
BBC
)
Extra Intrigue
Three stories we couldn’t shoehorn in this week
Supply Chains:
The folks at WSJ did an interesting deep dive into how China
managed to buy ports across the world
, from Darwin and Panama to Georgia.
Sport:
In a trial that’s gripped Canada for weeks, a court has acquitted five former NHL hockey players
of alleged assault against a woman
in 2018.
Diplomacy:
A former CIA officer has argued that
US envoys are often undercut
by unclear mandates, inadequate resources, and bureaucratic infighting, all driving the need for a new and better model. Speaking of which…
Meme of the day
Courtesy of our meme-lord JD (@DickerPicss on Insta).
You’ve just spent four years in Equatorial Kundu, plus the earlier 18 months getting fluent in Kundese. Your spouse’s pool-building career is on life support, your kids miss their schnauzer who couldn’t clear quarantine, and your ambassador just got recalled over that big $25 taxi receipt scandal, meaning your next promotion application is now DOA.
But oooooh look, that pistachio tariffs job at the embassy in Qumar just opened up! Waddiya think, kids — would you like to live in Qumar next?
Friday Quiz
How closely have you paid attention to this week’s newsletters?
1) A univeristy belonging to which European country opened an agricultural science campus in Kazakhstan?
🇮🇹 Italy
🇫🇷 France
🇵🇱 Poland
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) How much is China's new mega dam expected to cost?
$79B
$108B
$167B
$306B
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) The Australian government is considering declaring which phenomenon a natural disaster?
Wildfires
Toxic algae bloom
Floods
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate