URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/that-vanity-fair-story
Title: 🌍 That Vanity Fair story

Today’s briefing:
—
That
Vanity Fair story
— The nation buying a city with bitcoin
— A (fake) coup in France
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Whenever I tell people that I live in the US, they generally ask me, “
where?
” And when I answer Washington DC, they usually give me a look that’s somewhere between pity and concern, accompanied by the question “
what’s it like?
” (or “
why?!
”, lol.)
I can understand why people are so curious about what daily life is actually like in the US capital, given the barrage of stories emerging on the daily. And with the sheer volume of news that comes out from DC, it’s easy to miss most details.
But one story that’s definitely caught the eye of DC-watchers everywhere recently is
the piece in
Vanity Fair
, in which
Susie Wiles
,
the White House chief of staff, shares all
. That’s our top story today - buckle up.
PS
— Tomorrow (Friday) is our
last regular briefing for the year
, but we’ll be back in your inbox from Monday January 5th (after some special editions over the break).
Number of the day
8.85 billion tonnes
That’s how much coal the world is expected to consume in 2025, a new high, though International Energy Agency forecasters expect demand will ease by 2030.
Yes,
that
Vanity Fair interview.
The last time a top Trump advisor revealed a bit too much during an on-the-record interview, that advisor not only got immediately fired, but his surname (Scaramucci) became the metric by which the tenures of all future Trump officials would be measured.
So if we hereby calculate that one
Scaramucci
equals 11 days, then President Trump’s current chief of staff
Susie Wiles
lasted exactly 30 Scaramuccis before Vanity Fair dropped a
bombshell piece
based on her months of
on-the-record chats
throughout Trump 2.0.
And while it contains enough
palace intrigue
to keep DC frothing well into the 2060s (Wiles labels other key White House players zealots, conspiracy theorists, and ketamine-junkies), she also reveals plenty about Trump’s approach to our wider world.
So let’s dive in, shall we?
Venezuela
It’s interesting how much Wiles uses Venezuela — from start to finish — as a distilled case study of Trump’s broader foreign policy. It makes a bit of sense: while both Putin and Hamas pulled their latest triggers before Trump’s return, Maduro has been in the palace since 2013, and ruling by decree since 2015 — so this latest escalation is more on Trump.
That’s why this
one phrase from Wiles
is so revealing: she says Trump
“wants to keep on blowing boats up until Maduro cries uncle. And people way smarter than me on that say that he will.”
Ie,
in one breath she confirms two things we’ve long flagged:
first
, that the counter-narcotics framing is just a fig-leaf to oust Maduro.
And second
, like it or not, it
might
work (Maduro has been haggling over exile terms since at least early November).
And in the Americas at least, this all hints at Trump’s preference for
1
) coercion over containment,
2
) unilateral action over multilateral pressure, and
3
) personal dominance over institutional strategy. Legal, humanitarian, or regional fallout? Wiles won’t blink.
Russia and Ukraine
This is where
Wiles gets wild
— there’s little in history to suggest giving Putin more of other people’s land is the solution. To the contrary, whether it’s Georgia (2008), Crimea (2014), or broader Ukraine (2022), he’s denied and even derided fears he might invade, only to do it anyway before moving on to his next (bigger) objective.
Now almost as if on cue,
Putin just gave another speech
calling European leaders swine, and claiming he won’t end his war without Ukraine’s capitulation. Then enter Wiles with this: “
The experts think that if he could get the rest of Donetsk, then he would be happy.
”
But before we can ponder
which DC experts might believe
let alone advise this, the Vanity Fair piece paraphrases Wiles as suggesting, “
privately, Trump wasn’t buying it—he didn’t believe Putin wanted peace.
”
Now, a chief of staff’s job is to
make their boss look good
, but this Wiles framing is almost the opposite of how things appear: President Trump returned to power on claims his personal connection with the Russian despot would help prove the experts wrong.
As for that personal connection? Wiles gives an equivocal description: “
very mixed.
”
War and peace
Now to conclude, presidents often use their second term to build a legacy abroad, so Wiles is on-brand when she tackles portrayals of Trump as a warmonger. To the contrary, Wiles says, “
I cannot overstate how much his ongoing motivation is to
stop the killing
”.
To that end, much of the piece attributes any Trump wins to what a NYT op-ed has described as “
cowboy diplomacy
” — shatter taboos, greet pariahs, but get the deal done.
And yet one of the most interesting bits about this Wiles tell-all is how much she also reflects bluntly on the downsides of going full cowboy:
On shutting-down rather than (say) reforming USAID
? An aghast Wiles notes “
no rational person could think the USAID process was a good one. Nobody.
”
On the
Liberation Day
tariffs?
Wiles says the on-again-off-again rollout was “
thinking out loud
”, and observes “
it’s been more painful than I expected
”, though it’s unclear if she means the economic, diplomatic, or political pain (or all three).
But it’s at this point that Wiles redirects things back to the home front, arguing “
more talks about the domestic economy and less about Saudi Arabia is probably called for.”
She adds that US voters
“
like peace in the world. But that’s not why he was elected.
”
Intrigue’s Take
We often get (and appreciate!) feedback suggesting we focus too much on the US. And believe us — we didn’t get those sweet sweet diplomatic passports to focus only on the US.
But the reality is the US (or at least DC) is in the midst of a massive change with strategists everywhere now grappling daily with the implications. Just yesterday, a new DC
think-piece
gave voice to some of the allied whispers we’ve heard, warning bluntly that “
it’s time to stop pretending the old order can be preserved and time to start working on Plan B.
”
Some US allies are now even putting their own name to it, whether it’s Germany’s Merz casually declaring Pax Americana now over, or Finland’s Stubb penning an entire essay fleshing out how
the West’s Plan B
might even look: stick to core principles, reform key institutions, while pragmatically partnering with the Global South.
So all that to say… it’s hard to think of a bigger question right now than what’s shaping US strategy. And it’s hard to think of a better source on that than the US president’s own chief of staff, even if she’s pivoting between legacy-polish and grenade-throw.
Sound even smarter:
Months after USAID’s demise, a
live tracker
out of BU suggests 150,000 people have now already died as a result, and that’s just from a single program (PEPFAR).
Wiles has dismissed the (on-the-record) Vanity Fair article as a hit piece, and key administration powerbrokers are reiterating their support for the chief of staff.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
Face Off
The U.S.–China relationship generates constant headlines, from skipped G20 meetings to negotiations that could shape Taiwan’s future.
Face-Off
is an award-winning podcast that cuts through the noise to deliver you the real story, with essential historical context. Hosted by Jane Perlez, longtime foreign correspondent for The New York Times,
Face-Off
is an inside look at the turbulent relationship between these two superpowers, the men in charge, and the vital issues that affect us all.
Tune into Season 3 today!
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
Everything everywhere all at once.
In a final pre-Christmas rush of news, the Epstein files are due out Friday, Trump ally Dan Bongino has announced he’s stepping down as FBI deputy director, billionaire Musk ally Jared Isaacman has been confirmed as NASA’s next boss, and Congress has failed to pass a resolution curbing Trump’s claimed narco-boat strikes. (
ABC
)
🇷🇺
RUSSIA
-
Mysterious death.
Serbian authorities want answers after a state-owned arms-maker executive turned up dead on a Moscow street last month. His death came after Russian intelligence accused Serbia’s defence sector of covertly selling arms to Ukraine. (
Defence Blog
)
🇹🇷
TURKEY
-
What’s your returns policy?
Ankara has reportedly asked Russia to take back the S-400 air defence systems it sold Turkey, in a final bid to get US approval for top-tier F-35 jets instead. (
Turkish Minute
)
Comment
: It’s quirky for a NATO ally to stock Russian kit, but this is now really just a cold calculation from Ankara: Russia’s S-400 has performed poorly against Ukraine, while America’s F-35 performed well (for Israel) against Iran. So it’s a no-brainer trade.
🇪🇺
EUROPEAN UNION
-
50/50.
European leaders are now in Brussels deciding whether / how to use Russia’s frozen assets to back Ukraine’s self-defence. While most (like Germany’s Merz) support the idea, Italy’s Meloni wants a solid legal basis, and Belgium’s De Wever wants more EU backing against any Russian reprisals — executives at Belgium’s Euroclear have had to hire bodyguards amid Kremlin threats. (
Guardian
)
🇩🇪
GERMANY
-
Last-minute shopping.
The German budget committee has approved a record ~$59B defence package, including new uniforms, protective equipment, and 200 fighting vehicles. (
DW
)
Comment
: Lest you think the Germans are just splurging on fancy new threads, they’re almost tripling troop numbers to 450,000 by 2035, while investing more on their military over the last three years than in the eight years prior.
🇮🇳
INDIA
-
Read the fine print.
India’s exports grew nearly 20% in November (yoy) thanks to increased trade with the US and China. (
Al Jazeera
)
Comment
: Surprised by such a bump amid 50% US tariffs on India? India’s exports grew the most in sectors (like electronics and pharma) exempt from Trump’s tariffs.
🇧🇹
BHUTAN
-
Bitcoin City’s back.
The Land of the Thunder Dragon is pledging up to 10,000 bitcoin (~$870M) to develop its planned new Gelephu Mindfulness City, after years of mining the cryptocurrency as a sovereign asset. (
CoinDesk
)
Extra Intrigue
Let’s “
circle back
”
🤢
on three recent stories
Thailand and Cambodia
are still exchanging fire as Thailand demands Cambodia withdraw troops from contested border zones. We wrote about the drivers behind this long-simmering conflict
here
.
Warner Bros
is leaning towards the Netflix buyout offer after rejecting a bid from rival Paramount. We wrote about the geopolitics of that merger drama
here
.
Jihadis are still closing in on Mali’s capital
, financed by a $20M ransom they extracted in return for an Emirati prince. We wrote about this blockade
here
.
Fake video of the day
A still from the video in question.
French President Emmanuel Macron has been deposed in a coup!?
That’s obviously not true: first, you didn’t suddenly get breathless notifications from that near-defunct 2007-era college group chat. And second, today’s Intrigue didn’t lead with it.
However, an AI-generated video reporting on this ✌️coup✌️ has already racked up 13 million views, and apparently even fooled an unnamed world leader enough to text President Macron asking “
what is happening in your country?
” Although in that unnamed leader’s defence, it’s a fair question most days!
But maybe here’s the most worrying bit: when Macron’s team contacted Meta, the US tech giant initially declined to remove the video, arguing it didn’t violate platform rules.
Today’s poll
It’s the final poll of the year!
What do you think was the biggest story of 2025?
💸 Trump tariffs
✊ Gen Z protests
🤖 AI / chips race
🕊️ Gaza ceasefire
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you share MI6's concerns around the tech broligarchy?
🚨
Yes, it's now a security issue (93%)
✖️ No, it's still subject to our laws (6%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (1%)
Your two cents:
🚨
R.L:
“These corporations have more influence over people than governments, already affecting the economy, elections, wars, and culture more than heads of state and legislatures.”
✖️
R.D:
“While the tech broligarchy has a lot of weight, we've seen time and time again, the corporations will play along when push comes to shove.“
✍️
D.A:
“Governments fear what they don't control. We should fear governments that control.”