URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/the-great-wealthy-migration-f17584cf67752d34
Title: 🌍 The great wealthy migration

Today’s briefing:
— The great wealthy migration
— This country just ditched term limits
— Who made that map?!
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Thanks to everyone who wrote in about yesterday’s story. The Israel-Gaza issue divides opinion like nothing else, but we’re grateful to have such a generous and insightful community.
To roll us gently into August—aka the month when Europeans treat productivity like a contagious disease and quarantine at the beach accordingly—let’s take a look at
where the world’s uber-rich are hanging out
these days (spoiler: the lower the taxes, the better).
Number of the day
69
That’s how many countries are in President Trump’s latest
tariff order
, issued ahead of his 1 August deadline. The new US tariffs include 10% (Brazil, UK), 15% (Turkey, Norway), 25% (India), 30% (South Africa), 39% (Switzerland), and 41% (Syria). More deets below.
Migratory patterns
Sometimes geopolitics can give off epic David Attenborough vibes. Those pompous state visits? An intricate mating ritual. Border clashes? The alpha's fending off a younger rival.
So today? We look at the great migration of the ~142,000 uber-wealthy who’ll move abroad this year, driven by the winds of change, opportunity, and… just lower taxation.
Here are three of the most popular destinations, according to the
2025 H&P Private Wealth Migration Report
:
🇦🇪
UAE
No surprises here. If the zero income tax wasn’t enough, the Emiratis also boast a stable (if not exactly free) political landscape, low crime, and
a flourishing community of other cashed up emigres
you might bump into getting a new drill down at the Home Depot: Pakistan’s three-time PM (Nawaz Sharif), Zimbabwe’s ex-first lady Grace Mugabe, Spain’s former king, and Thailand’s godfather Thaksin Shinawatra have all had pads there.
But as they’re wont to do, the Emiratis want more! So the Gulf state expanded its Golden Visa program in 2022 to make it easier for the rich to relocate.
But there are
push factors
, too: Russia’s latest invasion of a neighbour saw the Russian-speaking population in the UAE quintuple to ~100,000, using elite spots like Palm Jumeirah and Jumeirah Lakes Towers to evade Western sanctions or Putin’s conscription.
🇺🇸
USA
High-profile Americans like fashion designer Tom Ford and TV host Ellen De Generis famously skipped town for the UK to
avoid Trump 2.0
, and they weren’t alone: citizenship inquiries from wealthy Americans reportedly doubled in early 2025, while Americans overtook folks from China to become London’s largest luxury property buyers.
But Uncle Sam clearly still has appeal if you can afford his investor visa ($800k+). And President Trump wants to ramp that up via his ‘Trump Card’, with a reported 70,000 folks already on the wait list for the $5M scheme (though the timeline is unclear).
Why?
Folks cite familiar drivers including the country’s leading universities, business-friendly environment, and the inescapable allure of the American dream. And speaking of the dream…
🇮🇹
Italy
Let’s be real, does this one need an explanation? That quality of life, cuisine, climate, luxury sector, and an entire season of
The White Lotus
?! C’mon.
But Italy’s financial hub of Milan has also attracted high-net-worth foreigners thanks to a favourable tax regime for non-domiciled residents (ie, exemptions on overseas income earned by foreign-born local residents).
But where are all these squillionaires coming from?
🇬🇧
UK
The above report forecasts the UK as the top source, though determining why is always tricky — emigres don’t tend to give exit interviews, unless you’re billionaire Norwegian shipping magnate John Fredriksen, who wanted the entire world to know why he’s selling his $340M Chelsea manor and moving to the UAE: “
Britain has gone to hell, like Norway.
”
Way to flame two countries with one burn there, John! But the main reason he cites is clearly a common driver: the UK abolishing its own centuries-old ‘non-dom’ tax rules.
That’s a little different to the drivers we’re seeing in…
🇨🇳
China
Word is as many as 7,000 rich-listers plan to leave China this year, reflecting both:
a) An uncertain politico-economic outlook, and
b) The Communist Party’s occasional distrust towards the uber-wealthy.
But China’s sheer scale means its economy will likely produce many more than the 7,000 millionaires it loses this year. So,
bon voyage
? Meanwhile…
🇮🇳
India
We were surprised to find India losing millionaires given its recent break-neck growth. But the rich apparently want better quality of life and more permissive business environments.
Like China, however, India curbs wealth transfers abroad, though there are always loopholes: common methods include crypto, and overpaying for imports. Still, this year’s figures suggest India’s great squillionaire emigration might be slowing down.
Intrigue’s Take
We
explored
earlier this week how trust has become so footloose: break it, and it can quickly flee to YouTube or Scandinavia. But as if any confirmation was needed, this story is a reminder that
cash is footloose
, too. And when it comes to private wealth, that’s kinda the point: the allure of financial independence is being able to pack your bags on a whim.
As to where folks go?
You might argue there’s now more appeal for some in authoritarian stability than democratic chaos: sure, the stakes are higher if you cross the wrong Emirati sheikh or Singaporean tycoon. But certain folks might prefer to run that risk than face protests outside the villa or high-taxin’ populists in the presidential palace.
Sound even smarter
:
There are questions around the methodology behind the above annual wealth migration report, which often ends up as fodder in debates around taxation.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
Mode Mobile
AI Frenzy Could Send ‘EarnPhone’ Soaring
Billions of data points — from your clicks, swipes, scrolls, and searches — are feeding the next wave of AI innovation.
Big Tech is harvesting it. Mode Mobile is giving it back to you. They are creating a
user-powered data economy that shares the upside
, and +50M users have already generated +$325M in earnings.
This isn't a theory… Mode’s 32,481% revenue growth from 2019-2022 landed them the #1 spot on Deloitte’s 2023 list of fastest growing companies in software.
AI breakthroughs are everywhere, but these models need your data to survive. Invest in the company that allows you to share in the profits from yours.
🚨
Round closing — invest at 0.30/share now.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇨🇦
CANADA
-
Howdy, neighbour.
Prime Minister Carney has issued a relatively measured response to President Trump’s 35% tariff announcement, noting Canada’s exports to the US are still tariff-free if they comply with the existing US-Mexico-Trade deal (CUSMA) — ie, if they’re made with enough local labour and inputs. (
The PM’s office
)
Comment:
While most of Canada’s exports are CUSMA-eligible, only ~38% actually had the certification last year. Carney’s statement voices disappointment and pushes back on the fentanyl justification, but the PM’s thrust is more to reiterate Canada’s commitment to CUSMA, and to cut down the various internal trade barriers back home. This reminds us of the ‘small target’ strategy employed by…
🇲🇽
MEXICO
-
Breathing room.
While Canada got whacked with 35%, President Trump announced another 90-day extension for Mexico as they hammer out a deal. (
CNBC
)
Comment:
This came after a call with Trump’s Mexican counterpart, Claudia Sheinbaum, who seems to have garnered the president’s quiet admiration. It’s unclear exactly how or why, though maybe that’s the point: Sheinbaum doesn’t have to worry about re-election (she’s term-limited) so she’s not litigating this via the media.
🇵🇰
PAKISTAN
-
Deal!
The US and Pakistan have announced a last-minute trade deal, featuring US tariffs of 19% (down from
Liberation Day'
s 29%) in return for an unspecified US role in developing Pakistan’s sizeable oil reserves. (
AA
)
Comment
: This could just be to avert today’s Trump-imposed 1 August deadline. Or it could be a US strategy to cleave Pakistan away from its friends next door in Beijing — that kind of strategy runs the risk of irking rival India next door, though it’s hardly Trump’s style to worry about that (he just called India’s economy dead!).
🇸🇻
EL SALVADOR
-
Don’t leave me.
Congress has approved a constitutional reform scrapping presidential term limits, meaning the ultra-popular President Bukele can now seek re-election indefinitely. He already crushed last year’s re-election after the supreme court (selected by his party) ruled that his current second run was okay. (
BBC
)
Comment:
The same ‘mano dura’ instincts that helped Bukele defeat organised crime will now help him accumulate (and retain) power. A familiar pattern on the continent
.
🇺🇬
UGANDA
-
Frenemy fire.
A skirmish between South Sudanese and Ugandan forces has left at least six soldiers dead. The two neighbours have pretty close ties, but there are occasional flare-ups along contested parts of their border. (
Al Jazeera
)
🇲🇲
MYANMAR
-
Emergency over?
The ruling junta has finally ended its 2021 state of emergency from when it seized power via a coup. The generals are preparing elections for December in hopes of securing sanctions relief, though they’re widely seen as a sham. (
Guardian
)
🇱🇹
LITHUANIA
-
Step down.
Prime Minister Gintautas Paluckas has stepped down following allegations of financial wrongdoing, triggering a government reshuffle. (
Politico
)
Comment
: With an expansionist Russia at its doorstep, the last thing NATO ally Lithuania needs right now is political instability.
Extra Intrigue
Some recommendations for the weekend ahead:
Read:
As the EU moves to ban ‘forever chemicals’, one Swedish town realises it has the
world’s worst case of contamination
.
Listen:
It turns out Siberian
mummies had sick tattoos
! Listen to their ancient story.
Watch:
This newly released documentary follows the investigation into the deadly
2005 London bombings
.
Map of the day
Ever thought the world was just one big joke? Well, folks in the 16th Century seemed to feel that way when they produced the above ‘
Fool's Cap Map of the World
’. Its origins and intended message have been lost to time, but one theory is the artwork was a commentary on the foolishness of anyone who thinks they’ve got the world figured out.
Friday Quiz
In light of the US president’s new tariff announcements above, we’ve got the perfect quiz!
1) What's the biggest free trade agreement, by total GDP?
Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership
The EU economic area
The Canada-US-Mexico Agreement
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) Which country has the biggest export sector, by % of GDP?
Goods and services
China
Singapore
Luxembourg
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) Which country has the world's biggest trade deficit?
China
Russia
USA
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Disclaimers
- Mode Mobile recently received their ticker reservation with Nasdaq ($MODE), indicating an intent to IPO in the next 24 months. An intent to IPO is no guarantee that an actual IPO will occur.
The Deloitte rankings are based on submitted applications and public company database research, with winners selected based on their fiscal-year revenue growth percentage over a three-year period.
Please read the offering circular and related risks at
invest.modemobile.com
.