URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/r-70de
Title: 🌍 The world watches Bondi

Today’s briefing:
— The world watches Bondi
— Switzerland’s cryptic tweet
— This clothing brand cannot be real
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Today’s briefing brings things a little closer to home for team Intrigue, as our very own co-founder Helen was at Sydney’s famous Bondi Beach a short while before it became the site of
Australia’s worst-ever terrorist attack
.
Thankfully Helen is okay, but the attack has rattled a city and a nation, while generating headlines around the world. So let’s get you up to speed.
PS
- Our final standard briefing for the year will be
this Friday
, but we’ll slide into your inbox a few more times over the break to keep you in the loop.
Number of the day
15.9%
That’s how far property investment in China has fallen (yoy) in the first 11 months of 2025, widening by more than a percentage point in the last month alone.
An outrage foretold?
Our own Helen snapped this pic at Bondi shortly before Sunday’s terrorist attack.
The Jewish community’s Hanukkah flyer invited locals to “
fill Bondi with joy and light.
”
Instead, father-son duo Sajid (50) and Naveed (24) Akram opened fire in an attack that’s left at least 16 dead (including Sajid) and ~50 more in hospital.
So let’s get you up to speed on eight of the reasons why this event is now rippling around the world, starting with the…
Location
Bondi isn’t just any old patch of sand. It’s one of Australia’s most
iconic landmarks
, co-located with one of Australia’s largest Jewish communities (in Sydney’s eastern suburbs).
Which leads us to the…
Timing
Sunday wasn’t any old evening, but the first night of
Hanukkah
, the eight-day Jewish festival of lights celebrating the 164BC rededication of Jerusalem’s Second Temple.
And these two points lead us to the…
Victims
Several of the
festival-goers killed had ties abroad
, including a young Frenchman, a UK-born rabbi, a South African-born rabbi, a Ukrainian-born Holocaust survivor, a Soviet-born businessman, and a young girl from a local Russian language school.
And that leads us to some of the…
Responses
Dozens of world leaders have now condemned this attack, not just in its own right, or even because their own nationals were or could’ve been there (~three million tourists visit Bondi each year), but because this atrocity bears all the hallmarks of an
antisemitism and jihadism
that crossed borders long ago.
Yet only one of those world leaders above has also assigned…
Blame
Israel’s Netanyahu has
laid responsibility
at the feet of Australia’s Anthony Albanese, arguing this attack stems from his centre-left government’s failure to curb antisemitism after
Bibi’s own earlier warnings
that Australia
recognising a State of Palestine
would pour “
fuel on the antisemitic fire
”.
Australia hasn’t yet responded to this claim, though it gets to some of the underlying…
Drivers
Antisemitism has been around for millennia, but has surged since the Hamas attacks and subsequent Israel-Hamas war. Australia’s reported tripling in incidents even led Albanese to appoint
Australia’s first antisemitism envoy
, who just handed down her
report
this July, warning “
antisemitism has become a mainstream threat
”.
And barely a month later, we got a glimpse just how mainstream, as a portrait of Iran’s ayatollah appeared front-and-centre during a big Gaza solidarity march across Sydney’s famous Harbour Bridge, though prominent protesters nearby (including members of Albanese’s party) disavowed the image. But speaking of Iran…
Foes
You’ll recall Bondi was also home to a Jewish deli firebombing last year, which Australian intelligence attributed to
Iran
— Albanese quickly booted Iran’s ambassador in response.
Meanwhile,
pro-Kremlin
propagandist Simeon Boikov marked three years since he fled to Russia’s Sydney consulate just 3km (1.9mi) up the road from Bondi, to evade arrest for assault. We only mention Boikov because he periodically tweets antisemitic tropes in a neat illustration of what DC recently
documented
as the Kremlin’s century-long use of antisemitism to “
discredit, divide, and weaken”
rivals at home and abroad.
Anyway, maybe we should wrap with Sunday’s…
Heroes
The background of this father-son duo will feed into
immigration
debates in Australia and beyond, not to mention DC’s own
new focus
on how allies manage migration.
So maybe there’s poetry in the fact that one of the day’s heroes was local Syria-born shopkeeper
Ahmed al Ahmed
, who took two bullets while single-handedly disarming an attacker. He’s now received shout-outs from Trump and even Bibi, while a
fundraiser
in his honour closes in on a million dollars (with $100k alone from US investor Bill Ackman).
Intrigue’s Take
A mid-summer massacre on Australia’s most famous beach has shattered whatever was left of Australia’s sense of splendid isolation, but this still all falls in the
shocking-yet-not-surprising
basket: it’s been 16 months since Australia’s own domestic intel agency publicly raised the terrorist threat level back to ‘
probable
’ (behind ‘expected’ and ‘certain’).
It’s also been six years since that same agency (
ASIO
) first quietly investigated Naveed (the son) when he was barely 18 — he first popped up on counter-terrorism radars after one of his young acquaintances was arrested (then
convicted
) on terrorism charges.
The
months
of
surveillance
later aired in that court hearing paint a grim picture of the challenges Australia’s domestic spymaster recently
highlighted
, with broader relevance to just about everywhere: “
the most obvious trend is that the young are getting younger
”, he said — the average age folks now grab ASIO’s attention is just
15
.
Yet interestingly, that same spymaster also offered some insights into
the world’s path ahead
: “
You cannot arrest your way to social cohesion. You cannot regulate your way to fewer grievances. You cannot spy your way to less youth radicalisation.
” The answer? He argues you need “
whole of government, whole of community, whole of society responses.
”
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇨🇱
CHILE — New president, who dis?
As widely expected, arch-conservative José Antonio Kast has comfortably won Chile’s presidency, beating the ruling left-coalition’s Communist Party candidate with pledges to get tough on crime and immigration. (
BBC
)
🇺🇦
UKRAINE — NATO drop.
As peace talks continue, President Zelensky has flagged an openness to dropping Ukraine’s NATO ambitions in exchange for binding Western security guarantees. (
Japan Times
)
Comment
: It’s a big concession, not just because Ukraine’s NATO ambitions are enshrined in its constitution, but because Putin’s invasion is itself a reminder of
the last time
Western partners failed to uphold security pledges. Meanwhile, European diplomats are still haggling over using frozen Russian assets to back Ukraine, ahead of Thursday’s pivotal European Summit in Brussels. There’s been some fascinating debate on that among several of the international lawyers in our exclusive WhatsApp group (free to join by referring friends to Intrigue using your unique link down below!).
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES — Pax Silica.
The US has launched a new ‘
Pax Silica
’ initiative aimed at curbing “
coercive dependencies
” (ie, relying too much on China) along the entire chips supply chain. The founding participants include Japan, Korea, Singapore, the Netherlands, the UK, Israel, the UAE, and Australia. (
Politico
)
Comment:
Intriguers will notice the above list includes two of the three main chip players: there’s the US (leading in design) and the Netherlands (dominating lithography). The missing third? Taiwan, which dominates final fabrication. We’re guessing DC didn’t need another spat with Beijing right now, though Taiwan still scored a quiet guest invite alongside the EU, the OECD, and Canada.
🇭🇰
HONG KONG — Pro-democracy party disbands.
The city’s last real opposition party has voted to disband after years of pressure, threats, and isolation from Beijing’s ruling Communist Party. Meanwhile, a court has convicted pro-democracy media mogul Jimmy Lai on charges he lobbied foreign governments to impose sanctions on Hong Kong and China. (
Guardian
)
🇧🇾
BELARUS  — 123 prisoners freed.
Moscow-aligned Belarus has freed more political prisoners (including Nobel laureate Ales Bialiatski) in exchange for the US lifting certain sanctions. (
Al Jazeera
)
Comment
: We wrote about why the US might want to defrost its Belarus ties
here
.
🇨🇭
Switzerland
— Cryptic tweet.
Famously neutral Switzerland dropped an intriguing tweet last week, noting that “
in light of the deteriorating security situation, the Swiss government is realigning Switzerland's security policy.
” (
X/Twitter
)
Comment
: It’s generally not a good sign when even the Swiss are rattled
.
🇮🇷
IRAN — US raids ship headed for Iran.
It turns out US special forces raided a ship in the middle of the Indian Ocean last month, seizing a shipment of military-related goods from China to Iran. The US says it’s aiming to stop Iran from rebuilding its military. (
WSJ
$)
Comment
: These mid-sea interdictions will be more common as cross-border trust collapses, and global public goods like maritime sea lanes become more contested
.
Extra Intrigue
🤣
Your weekly roundup of the world’s lighter news
Someone has dumped a
huge pile of raw sausages
in downtown Bristol.
2,300 golden retrievers
(and their owners) have met at a park in Argentina.
US prisoners are
using drones to sneak in
steaks, crab legs, and seasoning mix.
China’s
interactive toys are delivering
Communist Party talking points.
And in news equal parts grim and absurd, Taliban authorities have
arrested several young men
for dressing up like the hit British TV show,
Peaky Blinders
.
Fashion of the day
Credits: Lockheed Martin Apparel
Everyone’s doing merch these days — singers, podcasters, cartoons, and even automakers are all happy to sell fans overpriced tees with their logos emblazoned across them.
[Side note to team Intrigue: did we already try selling overpriced tees?]
Anyway, we were still surprised to see the latest additions to that list: US arms giant Lockheed Martin! It turns out
Lockheed Martin Apparel
is a real Korean streetwear brand with a distinctive if derivative gorpcore feel — it’s part of a broader Korean trend of licensing random Western brands (from CNN to Jeep) for new clothing lines.
Today’s poll
What do you think Switzerland's cryptic tweet means?
🔥 The Swiss might nuance or ditch their neutrality
🤷 More defence spending, but no change to neutrality
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think Ukraine should hold elections soon?
🗳️ Yes, despite all the hurdles, it's needed (11%)
⛔ No, it's neither feasible nor helpful (57%)
🤔
Not right now, but right after a ceasefire/ deal (31%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (1%)
Your two cents:
⛔
T.B:
“This is an appropriate bluff-call from Zelensky designed to throw the ball back into Trump's court.”
🗳️
W.H:
“Given the recent (and rather massive) corruption scandal, an election would strengthen Ukraine's democratic credentials. And presumably give the US Administration one less grudge to hold.”
✍️
R.C.O:
“Russia is the country that needs real elections...”