URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/elections-shaking-eastern-europe
Title: 🌍 The elections shaking up Eastern Europe

Today’s newsletter supported by:
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
You’d think taking a bullet train doing 320km/h would be exhilarating enough, but not in Japan. Folks there decided to jazz things up a little by hosting a
live professional wrestling bout
in a bullet train’s narrow aisle (while at full speed).
Today’s briefing is a 4 min read:
⚡ What
Eastern Europe
’s election season means for Ukraine
.
🇸🇾
Syria
’s
Assad touches down in China.
➕
Plus:
Police pups in Chile, how the papers are covering the possible arrest of South Korea’s opposition leader, and raising an orphaned elephant in India.
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇰🇷
South Korea
: Seoul has hit North Korea with
fresh sanctions
targeting any illegal arms trading with Russia. Speaking at the UN, South Korean President Yoon warned that any such Moscow-Pyongyang deal would be a “direct provocation” against his country.
🇬🇧
UK
: King Charles wraps up his
first state visit to France
today (Friday). The monarch’s visit is part of a wider charm offensive to repair Franco-British ties strained by issues like AUKUS and Brexit.
🇮🇩
Indonesia
: Parliament has approved President Widodo’s
$216B budget for 2024
, aimed at supporting economic growth while stabilising prices. The 2024 budget is 64.5% bigger than this year’s.
🇭🇹
Haiti
: The country’s most powerful gang leader has
called for the armed overthrow of Prime Minister Ariel Henry
. Much of the country’s capital is under the control of criminal gangs.
🇸🇦
Saudi Arabia
: Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman (MBS) has warned that if Iran were to obtain a nuclear weapon, Saudi Arabia would push to
acquire one too
. The kingdom remains in talks with the US about acquiring a civilian nuclear capability.
⚡
Eastern Europe | Geopolitics
From left to right, the flags of Hungary, Slovakia, and Poland.
What’s up with Ukraine and Eastern Europe?
If you were surprised after hearing this week that Poland is “
no longer transferring weapons to Ukraine
”, you’re not alone.
Here’s what happened
. Responding to Russia’s naval blockade, Ukraine has exported more cheap grain via Europe, competing with local farmers there. So Poland has led a group (including Hungary and Slovakia) to impose their own curbs on Ukrainian imports, prompting a Ukrainian
lawsuit
at the WTO.
Explaining the move
, Polish President Duda
said
Ukraine’s fight for survival was like a “
drowning person
” pulling rescuers underwater. In turn, Ukrainian President Zelensky
argued
these countries were effectively helping Russia.
Later that night (Wednesday), Poland’s PM
said
it was no longer supplying arms to Ukraine, in remarks President Duda later said were misinterpreted.
This drama
has all felt a tad unexpected from Poland, where Russia-scepticism runs high; leaders make regular visits to Kyiv; folks have taken in millions of Ukrainian refugees; and NATO runs a vast hub supplying Ukraine.
So what’s going on?
Poland’s ruling Law & Justice Party (PiS) faces tough elections next month, so it’s pivoting to shore up support with:
🌾
some rural voters losing income to Ukrainian grain, and
😐 some euro-sceptic voters calling for a domestic re-focus.
Polling suggests the PiS may not win enough votes to hold power on its own, so a coalition government could emerge, embedding this recent pivot.
Intrigue's take:
There are two high-wire balancing acts on display here. The first is in Poland, where a clear majority still backs Ukraine, but specific issues (like grain, refugees, the economy) are contributing to voter fatigue.
The second is in Ukraine, where Zelensky needs to keep getting grain out and arms in, but the vigorous pursuit of both interests can risk political headaches for the leaders making it happen.
This week’s events show how hard it is for both sides to nail that balance.
Also worth noting:
Croatia says it’s considering imposing an
import ban on Ukrainian grain
. It’s due for elections next year.
The current frontrunner in Slovakia’s 30 September election has long campaigned for a halt to Slovakia’s weapons shipments to Ukraine, and does
not support sanctions against Russia
.
📰
How newspapers covered…
South Korea’s parliament passing a motion allowing for the arrest of the opposition leader on corruption charges
Tokyo, Japan
“South Korean lawmakers vote to arrest opposition leader, oust PM”
New York, US
“South Korean Prosecutors Want to Arrest Hunger-Striking Opposition Leader”*
Seoul, South Korea
“Supporters of opposition leader attempt to enter National Assembly in protest of passage of arrest motion”
*The opposition leader has been on a weeks-long hunger strike protesting various government policies
Today’s newsletter is supported by: Economist Impact
Economist Impact combines the rigour of a think-tank with the creativity of a media brand to incite change. We specialise in sustainability, healthcare, technology and globalisation, partnering with governments and corporations to provide solutions-oriented policy research and events.
Our weekly newsletter, Perspectives, spotlights our latest research and thought leadership through infographics, videos and expert commentary. Stay ahead by signing up below.
Sign up now
🇸🇾
Syria | Geopolitics
Photo credits:  Huang Zongzhi / AP
Assad gets the red carpet in China
Syrian leader Bashar Al-Assad touched down in China's eastern city of Hangzhou yesterday (Thursday), arriving on an
Air China charter
along a
China-friendly flight route
. It’s his first visit to the country since 2004.
What's Assad doing there?
His objective is to:
Rebuild his own legitimacy
, with the help of a few photos alongside President Xi and other leaders at the
Asian Games
, and
Rebuild his war-torn country
, where an economic crisis has recently triggered rare anti-Assad protests in his stronghold cities.
And why would China host Assad
, who still faces war crime
allegations
?
The Arab League already
readmitted
him in May after a decade of atrocity-related isolation, cutting the reputational costs for China to follow suit, and
Hosting Assad plays to China’s self-image in the region as a peacemaker, versus the image it
projects
of the US as a meddler.
Intrigue’s take:
It's hard to see China investing in Syria again any time soon. Its earlier investors already took a hit when the civil war erupted, and another $2B
pledge
from 2017 still hasn’t appeared. The insecurity and far-reaching
US sanctions
just make the costs too high.
But in the meantime, photo ops seem to serve both leaders’ aims.
Also worth noting:
China and Russia have vetoed eight UN Security Council resolutions against Syria, generally on the grounds that the resolutions interfered in Syria’s internal affairs and violated its sovereignty.
🎧 Today on
Intrigue Outloud
Munoz/Reuters
Don’t miss these behind-the-scenes highlights from our week at the UN
Listen here!
➕
Extra Intrigue
Some weekend suggestions from Team Intrigue. If you have:
3-36 mins
:
Have a listen to
this album
by Blick Bassy, a Cameroonian artist who sings in his mother tongue (Bassa).
40 mins
: Check out
this short documentary
about a couple in South India struggling to raise an orphaned elephant
.
45 mins
:
Unleash your inner Carmy Berzatto and try cooking this
Tom Kah Gai soup
.
📸
Photo of the day
Credits: Javier Torres / AFP
Chile celebrated Independence Day this week, marking its declaration of independence from Spain in 1810. The stars of the show were these puppies in backpacks, taking a break from police dog training to join their handlers in the parade.
🗳️ Quiz time!
Solidarity, the Polish trade union that became a hotbed of anti-Soviet resistance, was formally founded on this day in 1980. So here’s some Poland trivia!
1) What does the name 'Poland' (Polska) mean?
a) It's Polish for 'land by the sea'
b) It's a tribe name, referring to 'people living in open fields'
c) It's Polish for 'land of the bison'
b) It's an old Slavic word meaning 'land of the strong'
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) Poland's earliest written constitution of 1791 is generally considered...
a) The world's first
b) The world's second
c) The world's third
4) The world's fourth
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) Poland is the world's largest exporter of...
a) Rubber tyres
b) Electromagnetic products
c) Amber
d) Meat
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Quiz answers:
1-b; 2-b; 3-c