URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/latest-ukraine
Title: 🌍 The latest from Ukraine

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Some words are tough to translate, but we hope you’ll have a weekend full of
merak
(a sense of bliss and oneness with the universe), with plenty of time to
samar
(stay up late for a pleasant conversation), and maybe even a splash of the ol’
aspaldiko
(the joy of catching up with someone after way too long).
Today’s briefing is a 4 min read:
🇺🇦
The latest from the
Russo-Ukraine
War
.
🇱🇾
What happened in
Libya
.
➕
Plus:
E.T. goes to congress, how the papers are covering nationwide blackouts in Nigeria, and the longest UN speech ever.
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇦🇫
Afghanistan
: China has become the first country to
appoint a new ambassador to Afghanistan
since the Taliban retook Kabul in 2021. The Taliban is hoping Zhao Xing’s appointment will spur other countries to do the same.
🇪🇺
EU
: Tunisian authorities have
denied entry
to a group of EU parliamentarians scheduled to begin an official visit. While Tunis has offered no explanation, there’s speculation it’s in retaliation for EU criticism levelled at President Saied’s increasingly authoritarian approach.
🇰🇭
Cambodia:
Newly-appointed Prime Minister Hun Manet is in China for
a three-day state visit
. The trip is Hun’s first venture abroad since receiving the reins from his father Hun Sen last month.
🇻🇪
Venezuela:
President Nicolás Maduro announced during a meeting with Xi Jinping on Wednesday (13 September) that Venezuelan astronauts could “
soon
” join Chinese astronauts on a
mission to the moon
. He offered no timeline for the mission.
🇪🇬
Egypt
: Officials are
reportedly
considering holding presidential elections this year rather than in 2024 as had been assumed. President Sisi is currently struggling to lift the country from an economic crisis, but is widely expected to run for re-election (and win).
🇺🇦
Ukraine | Russo-Ukraine War
Where is the Russo-Ukraine war headed?
Ukraine has claimed some hits on Russian occupying forces lately, including:
Destroying an advanced
air defence system
in Crimea yesterday (Thursday), using drones to blind it then cruise missiles to destroy it
Seriously damaging a
landing ship and submarine
that were undergoing repairs at a dock in Crimea on Wednesday
Recapturing strategic
oil and gas platforms
in the Black Sea last weekend (they were reportedly housing radar equipment), and
Retaking various villages along the
southern
and
eastern
fronts over the past month, breaking through some initial Russian defences.
Meanwhile, Russia has reportedly
:
Launched missile attacks to destroy or damage more than
100 Ukrainian port facilities since July
, restricting grain exports
Repelled advances
elsewhere along the 1000km front thanks to mines, barricades, ‘dragon's teeth’, and anti-tank ditches, and
Claimed
Ukraine’s counter-offensive has “
failed
”.
Intrigue's take:
Two quotes come to mind here.
First, WWII General Omar Bradley’s old line that “
amateurs talk strategy and professionals talk logistics
”: in a war of attrition, supply lines are key. Hence the increased targeting of landing ships, port facilities, bridges, etc.
And second, “
gradually, then suddenly
”: this was a Hemmingway line on bankruptcy, but it fits war, too. Sure, we could be looking at
similar front-lines in five years
. But defences can collapse. And that happens quickly.
Also worth noting:
Ukraine says Russia is preparing for
another mobilisation drive
later this year. Russian officials have said there are no such plans.
📰
How newspapers covered…
A nationwide blackout in Nigeria
Lagos, Nigeria
“Blackout as Nigeria’s electricity generation drops 93.5% to 273MW”
Singapore
“Nigeria power grid collapse causes nationwide blackouts”
New York, US
“Timeline: Nigeria's electricity grid collapsed 47 times from 2017 to 2023”
Don’t miss behind-the-scenes coverage from Intrigue co-founder, John Fowler
Team Intrigue is heading to the Big Apple, and while taking in the sights of Lady Liberty and Broadway would be great, we’re going to be hanging out inside the United Nations headquarters.
Get exclusive access to:
High-quality analysis with actionable insights
LOL-worthy extra sections and challenging crosswords, and
Special offers from
The Economist
and its business groups.
Sign up with one click!
🇱🇾
Libya | Climate & energy
The city of Derna on 2 September and 12 September. Source: Planet Labs PBC
Libya mourns
Up to 20,000 people
may have been killed
in Libya’s eastern city of Derna (pop: 90,000) after catastrophic flooding this week.
The catalyst was a rare Mediterranean hurricane (‘
medicane
’) named Daniel, that caused deadly flooding in Greece, Turkey, Bulgaria and beyond.
After the storm turned south over the weekend, heavy rainfall caused two dilapidated dams near Derna to fail. A
60-foot wall of water
then inundated the city and swept entire neighbourhoods out to sea.
Intrigue’s take:
The
science
suggests these kinds of
medicanes
are becoming less frequent but more extreme. Either way, North African infrastructure was never built for storms like Daniel. And Libya’s years of conflict make adaptation near impossible.
Also worth noting:
Over 400mm (16 inches) of
rain fell
in the nearby city of Bayda on 10-11 September, more than Libya’s annual average rainfall.
The death toll in Libya already exceeds that of the 1927 Algerian floods (3,000 killed), making it Africa’s
deadliest storm
since 1900. It’s also the deadliest storm globally since at least 2013.
🎧 Today on
Intrigue Outloud
Is Europe back?
Find out here!
➕
Extra Intrigue
Sign up for next week’s extra Intrigue @ UNGA newsletter here!
📸
Photo of the day
Credits: Congress of Mexico
Mexico’s Congress heard testimony this week from a self-proclaimed ufologist (be sure to re-read that word), who unveiled what he said were 1,000-year-old “
non-human
” bodies, found in Peru in 2017. But another witness at the hearing (a former US fighter pilot)
declared
it all an “
unsubstantiated stunt
”, and
scientists
seem to be reaching the same conclusion.
🗳️ Quiz time!
Legendary detective novelist Agatha Christie was born on this day in 1890, so what better time to have a Christie-themed quiz?
1) Agatha Christie published romance novels under what pseudonym?
a) Dorothy Thomas
b) Frances Newbury
c) Alice Godlee
d) Mary Westmacott
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) How many detective novels did Agatha Christie publish?
a) 66
b) 103
c) 24
d) 57
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) When her fictional character Hercule Poirot died, he received a full-page obituary in which famous newspaper?
a) The Times
b) The Evening Standard
c) The Chicago Tribune
d) The New York Times
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Quiz answers:
1-d, 2-a, 3-d.
Crossword answers
:
Across
: 3. Russian, 4. Iceland, 5. Three (the UN Secretariat, based in NYC, has offices in Geneva, Vienna, and Nairobi), 7. Rockefeller, 8. Observer, 9. France
Down
: 1. Olive, 2. Kashmir (the speech ran for ~8 hours), 4. Indonesia, 6. London