URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/the-geopolitics-of-fashion-week
Title: 🌍 The geopolitics of fashion week

Today’s briefing:
— The geopolitics of fashion week
— Watch this Norwegian comedy
— They finally opened her house
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. US presidential humour falls into two distinct buckets — elaborately crafted by a team of speechwriters, and accidental. In the former camp, we have President Obama with this corker in 2008: “
I got my name Barack from my father. What you may not know is Barack is actually Swahili for ‘that one’. And I got my middle name from somebody who obviously didn’t think I’d ever run for president.
”
In the accidentally hilarious bucket, we have George W Bush’s iconic pivot from “
we must stop these terrorist killers
” to… well,
I won’t spoil it if you haven’t seen it
.
And then we come to the current White House occupant, who eludes categorisation. Sitting next to President Erdogan of Turkey yesterday, Trump remarked that the two “
have been friends for a long time, even for the four years when I was in exile unfairly, rigged elections. He [pointing at Erdogan] knows about rigged elections better than anybody…
”
Intriguers, I laughed. Whether it was the casual pointing at Erdogan, or what I imagine was the overwhelming awkwardness of the press pool, I laughed.
Now, before you depress your caps lock and hit reply on why it’s not funny and actually very serious, give today’s briefing on
the surprising geopolitics of fashion week
a read. It’s the kind of story you won’t read anywhere but Intrigue!
Mystery of the day
Why’d the US defence secretary just summon generals to a rare meeting?
Hundreds of US generals and admirals are due to fly in from around the world to meet Secretary Hegseth in Virginia next week. It’s unclear what this unusual gathering is about, with speculation ranging from messaging and motivation, to lay-offs or something else.
Dressing down
Everyone’s dressed weird, taxis are a more jealously-guarded resource than rare earths, and it’d be easier to sneak into Putin’s bunker than find a barstool for post-work drinks. This can only mean one thing:
fashion week is here
.
Every year, twice a year, thousands descend on four cities (NYC, London, Milan, and Paris) to see the newest designer creations at the forefront of a $1.7T global industry.
We know. We know. Why write about how to style the Pantone colour of the year (Mocha Mousse for those wondering) when the geopolitical Super Bowl (UNGA) is on next door?! Fear not, we’ll likely do an UNGA wrap-up on Monday once that dust has settled.
But in the meantime, let’s take a quick look at
the geopolitics of fashion week:
The VVIP guestlist
There are two ways to score a front row seat at a major fashion show: either be a celebrity, or spend a fortune to become a fashion house’s ‘
very important client
’ (VIC).
Brands live off that
symbiotic relationship
with influential clientele, but it can backfire. Most initially withdrew from Russia in solidarity with the Ukrainians after Putin went all-in, for example. But then… what about all those high-paying Russian clients?
Brands publicly distanced themselves at first, but that didn’t last long. As early as 2023,
Tatyana Naryshkina
(the wife of Putin’s sanctioned foreign intelligence chief Sergey Naryshkin) was back rolling around Parisian couture spots like it was nbd.
And now at fashion week events this year? It’s
oligarch wives
and ex-wives galore, with names like Perminova and others all
lounging
in the front row.
Fashion is (soft) power
Like any cultural output, fashion can help countries
burnish their brand abroad
: urgggh, it’s just so darn tough being this effortlessly hip and sophisticated all the time,
non
?
That’s why, for example, Italy’s foreign ministry has launched an initiative mobilising its diplomats to showcase Italian fashion abroad, with events at Dubai’s fashion week and beyond. It likely also helps diversify the sector’s revenues as China sales plateau.
But that
mix of soft power and cash
also explains why every global city — whether Hong Kong, São Paulo, Lagos, or Delhi — now has its own fashion week, too.
It’s a money maker
Fashion isn’t just something most world leaders lack a sense of. It’s a major industry accounting for 5% of the economy in Italy, 1.8% in the UK, and 3% in France.
And while it might sound cooler than, say, the US Packaging Association’s big annual cardboard box conference in Illinois, or the UK’s gathering of the Society of Bookbinders over in Kentish Town,
fashion week is at its core still just a trade show
like the others.
So in addition to filling hotel rooms and bars, the big purchasing decisions emerging out of fashion week have a long tail across local economies, and drive tourism year-round.
A runway for political statements
Of course, no gathering of creatives is complete until one of them weighs in on a political or geopolitical issue — aside from the merits of any particular cause, it also consistently generates massive brand awareness as legacy talking heads yell at each other in response.
A$AP Rocky
(who Liam Gallagher once amusingly called WhatsApp Ricky) debuted his
American Sabotage
line last year to critique American cultural decay
Vivienne Westwood
occasionally sneaks in designs promoting Scottish independence, and
Italy’s
Moschino
has now weighed in on the environment by having models rock handbags resembling trash bags.
Just us, or does that last one seem a lot like Derek Zoolander’s
Derelicte?
Intrigue’s Take
The term ‘
fashion diplomacy
’ sometimes gets bandied about, and it can seem like an excuse to legitimise foreign ministers hanging around red carpets while the world burns.
But wittingly or not, there’s substance under that oversized camel coat with exaggerated lapels over a sheer black turtleneck, paired with high-waisted, wide-leg trousers in deep burgundy. Sorry, got side-tracked there… where were we? Ah yes,
substance
.
One big issue evident in all these front-row Russian billionaires is the question of
tourist visas
. The EU kept dishing out a half million Schengen visas to Russians last year, even as Russia waged a war on Europe’s doorstep.
And it points at
the disunity within Europe
:
Those closest to Russia (and with a history of Russian occupation) like Estonia have imposed
near-total tourist bans
, noting Kremlin spooks use holiday cover stories to conduct espionage and sabotage, and arguing that every Russian must feel their own war’s sting to erode domestic support for Putin’s invasion.
Others (like the dissident Yulia
Navalnaya
) argue a ban would just fuel Kremlin isolationism and punish any anti-war Russians connected to Europe.
But ultimately, the EU’s approach seems more about the same thing greasing the wheels of fashion week every year: money. Tourism-heavy nations like Italy, Spain, France, and Greece still like those sweet rubles.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
Minderoo Foundation
AI, War & Humanity: We Still Have a Choice
As the world watches UNGA, the future of AI in conflict zones hangs in the balance between technology and empathy.
That’s why Minderoo Foundation launched a bilateral USA-China dialogue in 2019, which
grounded
a historic agreement:
humans, not AI, must remain in control of nuclear weapons
.
In partnership with the Brookings Institution, the Centre for International Security and Strategy, and Tsinghua University, we’ve shown what dialogue can achieve.
But dialogue alone is not enough. As Minderoo founder Dr Andrew Forrest explains:
“As the world sits atop the head of a needle, it is vital those who can act, do so.”
Global leaders must act now to protect future generations.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
More tariffs
President Trump has announced another wave of tariffs, including 100% on branded drugs (unless a firm is investing in the US), and 25% on heavy-duty trucks. He’s framing it as a way to protect US manufacturers from unfair competition. (
BBC
)
Comment:
Pharma shares have mostly shrugged this off — industry was already on notice from Trump’s national security pharma investigation. Furniture companies like Restoration Hardware, on the other hand, have seen their stocks fall as markets process the impact of new 30-50% furniture tariffs on such an import-heavy sector.
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
Comey indicted.
The US justice department has indicted former FBI director James Comey on allegations he lied to — and obstructed the proceedings of — a Congressional committee in the context of Russia’s 2016 electoral meddling. In response, Comey has declared, "
I'm innocent, so let's have a trial
". (
Politico
)
Comment:
These charges come a few days after President Trump tweeted (then deleted) a message that appeared intended for his attorney-general, urging her to prosecute Comey and others.
🇺🇿
UZBEKISTAN
-
We’ll look after this.
Switzerland’s ambassador to Uzbekistan has revealed that criminal assets repatriated to Tashkent are now helping finance Uzbek projects like school modernisation and poverty reduction initiatives. (
Times of Central Asia
)
🇱🇹
LITHUANIA
-
Fresh start.
Lithuania’s new ruling coalition has now formally taken office after its predecessor collapsed in July. The new centre-left prime minister (Ruginienė), who only entered national politics a few months ago, is pledging pro-Ukraine continuity. (
LRT
)
🇹🇭
THAILAND
-
A hole in the road.
A massive sinkhole has shut down parts of Bangkok’s government district. Initial findings suggest it’s related to a nearby metro construction project. (
Straits Times
)
🇨🇦
CANADA
-
Money honey.
Authorities have charged a Royal Bank of Canada employee after he allegedly accessed Prime Minister Carney’s profile in an organised crime scheme. (
CBC
)
🇲🇬
MADAGASCAR
-
Back by sundown.
Africa’s island nation of Madagascar has imposed a night-time curfew as protests against water and power cuts keep escalating. (
ABC
)
Extra Intrigue
Intrigue’s weekend recommendations
Watch:
There’s a
Norwegian comedy
from 2002 (throwback!), called
Most people live in China. But who lives in Norway?,
with fun little skits infused with hints of societal and political commentary.
Follow:
Intrigue’s socials (
Instagram
,
Linkedin
,
X
,
Bluesky
,
Youtube
) will give you that dash of extra Intrigue when you miss us between editions in your inbox.
Read:
This
action plan
from the folks at the
Center for Cybersecurity Policy and Law
lays out what the world should do about all the undersea cables getting cut.
Museum of the day
Credits: Museo Casa Kahlo.
That unassuming red clay building above?
It’s none other than Frida Kahlo’s former home in Mexico City’s beautiful old neighbourhood of Coyoacán. Okay, she technically only lived there for months while her more famous blue house (now run as a museum under the supervision of Mexico’s central bank) was getting renovated around the corner.
But this lesser-known red house above? It’s stayed in the family for four generations and is now opening to the public for the first time tomorrow (Saturday), apparently revealing a different side to the famed artist, including a cellar studio she’d hunker down in for days.
Friday poll
Moldova is holding parliamentary elections on Sunday.
Which EU leader said “There can be no secure EU without an independent Moldova?"
🇵🇱 Donald Tusk
🇩🇪 Friedrich Merz
🇫🇷 Emmanuel Macron
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
How many people live in Moldova?
5M
7.6M
2.4M
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
How many registered voters are in Moldova's breakaway region of Transnistria?
505,000
277,000
965,000
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate