URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/uk-hosts-ai-summit
Title: 🌍 The UK hosts an AI summit

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
It’s thanks to you that we can do what we love, so to show our gratitude… we’re sending one Intrigue reader $2,000 in cold hard cash! Scroll down, or
click here
for more info.
Today’s briefing is a 4 min read:
🤖
The
world
races to shape
AI
regulation.
🌱
The
road to COP28
: why’s a petrostate playing host?
➕
Plus:
A philosophical flag, how the papers are covering the conviction of a crypto kind, and the best French toast in London.
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇨🇳
China
: Beijing has called for a
ceasefire in Myanmar
after clashes near the Chinese border. Myanmar’s military junta later said it had lost control of the strategic town to the opposition.
🇮🇹
Italy
: Prime Minister Meloni has unwittingly told
two Russian pranksters
that Europe is “
tired
” of the war in Ukraine. Critics have previously accused the duo of acting as a “
pro-Kremlin tool
”.
🇮🇩
Indonesia
: Authorities have seized weapons and
arrested 59 people
suspected of planning to attack next year’s presidential election. The suspects belong to local Al-Qaeda and ISIS affiliates.
🇦🇷
Argentina
: Buenos Aires has
repaid a $2.6B maturity to the IMF
, injecting some stability into the country’s debt payments. It comes ahead of runoff presidential elections later this month.
🇪🇬
Egypt
: Hundreds of foreign passport holders have
crossed into Egypt from Gaza
for the first time since October 7th. A limited number of severely injured Palestinians were also allowed to cross.
🇬🇧
UK | Artificial Intelligence
Sunak gets the US and China to agree on AI
UK Prime Minister Rishi Sunak hosted over 25 world leaders for a two-day
AI safety summit
this week, focussed on AI dangers and opportunities.
The world is pouring cash into AI right now, with the annual rate
projected
to hit $200B by 2025. And it’s impacting every sector, while also empowering citizens to
brew better beer
or
add mullets
to world leaders.
But the pace of change has instilled a sense of urgency around AI regulation.
So here are some quick highlights from the UK’s two-day summit:
✍️ 29 nations (including the US and China)
signed the
Bletchley Declaration
on basic AI principles (eg,
AI “
poses significant risks
”)
💻 Leading
AI companies
(Open AI, Google, Microsoft) agreed to work with governments to
test their new AI models
, and
📅
South Korea and France agreed to keep it all rolling,
hosting the next two AI summits
over the coming year.
Intrigue's take:
While some argue for the UN to lead here, it’s hard to see an effective UN process emerging in time, let alone keeping pace thereafter.
So in the meantime, states will keep racing to develop and deploy AI. Yet very few states actually have the resources or technological know-how to compete, and virtually all that
do
were gathered at Bletchley this week.
So to the extent we get meaningful AI regulation any time soon, our sense is it’ll look more plurilateral (like this week) rather than multilateral (via the UN).
And that’s probably better than nothing.
🎧 Intrigue Outloud
Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas
On today's Intrigue Outloud podcast:
where next for the Palestinian political project?
(featuring Khaled Elgindy of the Middle East Institute)
🎧 Listen here to find out
📰
How newspapers covered…
The
conviction of Sam Bankman-Fried
New York, USA
“FTX founder Sam Bankman-Fried convicted of ‘one of the biggest frauds in U.S. history’"
London, UK
“'Crypto King' Sam Bankman-Fried guilty of FTX fraud”
Melbourne, Australia
“Sam Bankman-Fried convicted for massive FTX fraud, in stark reminder of risks of crypto trading”
💰 We’re giving you $2,000 💰
A few weeks ago, we asked you what you most wanted from a giveaway, and the majority of you answered:
cold hard cash.
Well, good news! We've partnered with some of our favourite newsletters for a
$2,000 giveaway
that you can spend on anything you like. Winners will be drawn on 21 November - just in time for holiday shopping.*
And every person that enters actually helps our newsletter grow - so, what are you waiting for?
Enter here!
*Offer only valid for US-based readers.
🌱
Road to COP28
We’ll answer your COP questions every Friday! Today’s was chosen by our Diplomatic Club*: Why’s the UAE, a major oil exporter, hosting COP this year?
The UAE’s Sultan Al-Jaber is hosting COP28 from 30 November
Meet your host
70,000+ delegates from around the world will descend on Dubai later this month for the 28th UN Climate Change Conference (aka COP28).
Dubai may seem like an odd choice. The United Arab Emirates (UAE) is:
⛽ The world’s eighth-largest oil producer
🛢️ The world’s tenth-largest
gas producer
, and
♨️ A top ten
emitter
per capita.
Plus COP28’s president, Sultan Al-Jaber, also heads up the UAE’s state-owned oil company, which announced a
$150B expansion
last year.
So first, a technical answer to “why the UAE?”
: the COP host normally rotates among the five
UN regional groups
. This year it’s the Asia-Pacific’s turn, and that group (which includes the Middle East) put forward the UAE.
Intrigue’s take:
And now the intriguing answer
:
far from a bug, Al-Jaber has sought to make his fossil fuel connections a feature of this year’s summit.
His logic
:
cutting emissions means cutting oil and gas, and the oil and gas industry needs to be at the table to help manage that process. As a petrostate, the UAE argues it’s the right consensus-builder to steward this.
The problem
:
the industry already has a seat at the table. Quite a few seats, in fact (
industry reps
outnumbered all but one country last year). So critics say the UAE is not so much managing the energy transition, as slowing it.
Al-Jaber and the UAE have a bit to prove.
* To join our Diplomatic Club, just refer five folks with your unique link below!
➕
Extra Intrigue
Some recommendations if you’re spending the weekend in
🇬🇧
London
:
Eat
: If you’re craving French toast, give
Crome
a try.
Shop:
Hit up the ‘
The Big London Flea
’ for all your retro needs.
Learn
: Pay a visit to the
Sir John Soane's Museum
, the former house of one of England’s greatest architects.
🏁
Flag of the day
Jamaica has one of only two national flags that don’t feature red, white, or blue. According to a
government paper from 1962
, its colours reflect the country’s ethos:
“hardships there are but the land is green and the sun shineth."
Based on that cracking description,
our rating: 9.9/10
🗳️ Quiz time!
1) How many species are now under threat of extinction?
(per the International Union for Conservation of Nature’s Red List)
a) 4,000
b) 542
c) 42,100
d) 1,340
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) How much global electricity produced in 2022 was solar?
a) 4.5%
b) 8%
c) 12%
d) 13%
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) Who was the first to ban single use plastic bags?
a) Kenya
b) Germany
c) Vietnam
d) Bangladesh
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Answers:
1-c, 2-a, 3-d.