URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/eu-tunisia-sign-migration-pact
Title: 🌍 The EU and Tunisia sign migration pact

Today’s newsletter supported by:
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Everyone loves a rescue story, and it’s tough to beat this one: a decade ago, a Salvadoran fisherman went missing off the coast of Mexico.
14 months later
, he
washed up
on the other side of the Pacific, having survived off raw fish and rainwater. But the
world record
goes to a Japanese captain who disappeared off the coast of Japan in 1813, and was found
16 months later
near California.
Today’s briefing is a 5 min read:
🇹🇳
The
EU
and
Tunisia
sign a major migration pact.
🇲🇱
Why
Mali
is ending up with sensitive US information.
➕
Plus:
Spain is gearing up to vote, how the papers are covering the runup to Cambodia’s general election, and why the
Oppenheimer
film could be a warning for Silicon Valley.
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇰🇷
South Korea
: At least 41 people have died following
massive floods triggered by heavy monsoon rains
. President Yoon says he’ll overhaul the country's approach to extreme weather, adding "
we must accept climate change is happening, and deal with it
".
🇷🇺
Russia
: Moscow has
pulled out of the Black Sea grain deal
that’s enabled Ukraine to keep supplying agricultural products to the world. In peacetime, Ukraine produced enough food exports to feed around 400 million people.
🇮🇳
India
: Fast food chain McDonald's has
dropped tomatoes from its menu
in northern and eastern India after tomato prices quadrupled there in a couple of weeks. Bad weather and a mismatch between supply and demand are to blame for the shortages.
🇬🇹
Guatemala
: Chaos has gripped Guatemalan politics after the country’s attorney-general, accused of corruption by the US last year, announced the
suspension of a leading opposition party
ahead of August’s runoff election.
🇮🇷
Iran
: The
morality police will resume
patrols to enforce Iran’s strict modesty laws, 10 months after widespread protests rocked the regime. Women seen not wearing a head veil in public risk being arrested and taken to ‘re-education facilities’ run by the police.
🇹🇳
Tunisia | Migration
Tunisia and EU ink billion dollar migration deal
After months of speculation, Tunisia and the EU have finalised a deal to try and stem irregular migration from northern Africa. The negotiations culminated in a
slightly
awkward
4-way handshake
between the leaders of Tunisia, Italy, the Netherlands, and the European Commission on Sunday.
Boat departures from Tunisia
to Europe have spiked in recent months
, with some estimating
3,000 folks are embarking on the journey each day
.
So this deal seeks to respond with a
package of five ‘pillars’
:
🧑‍🎓
Opening more programs for Tunisian students
💰 Up to ~$1.1B in budget support for Tunisia (T&Cs apply)
🚢
Activities to boost trade and investment with Tunisia, and
🔋
Assistance for Tunisia’s green energy transition.
That’s four non-migration pillars, really all in Tunisia’s favour.
So what’s the 5th pillar the EU gets in return?
🧑‍🤝‍🧑
More Tunisian cooperation on border control, anti-smuggling, and return operations, with ~$112M in EU funding.
Intrigue's take:
Tunis needs this injection of euros to stabilise its free-falling economy, and Brussels probably needs Tunisia’s help to manage EU borders.
But while the ink on the deal is barely dry, you can imagine the questions folks are asking around Tunisia’s
human rights record
, the president’s
authoritarian streak
, and the sheer volume of euros on offer.
The EU leader didn’t take media questions on Sunday, but we can imagine her answers: on this issue at least, it seems the ends justify the means.
Also worth noting:
€900M of the EU’s pledged budget support will depend on an IMF bailout which Tunisia
just rejected
due to the IMF’s “diktats”.
A UN body issued a
rebuke
after Tunisian President Saied’s comments about “hordes of illegal migrants” earlier this year.
In March, Europe’s parliament
criticised
Tunisia’s ongoing crackdown on civil society.
📰
How newspapers covered…
The run-up to this month’s Cambodian election
Phnom Penh, Cambodia
“Election unshaken by dissent: National Election Committee”
Bonn, Germany
“Cambodia: Hun Sen holds control of media ahead of election”
Hong Kong
“Cambodia’s Hun Sen poised to extend 38-year rule, without his favoured platform Facebook”
Today’s newsletter is supported by: Care.com
Small word. Huge impact.
$340 billion is spent annually on care. 10,000 people turn 65 every day. 80% of brain development occurs from the ages of zero-four. It’s when quality childcare is absolutely critical. 50% of families in the USA live in a childcare desert. There’s the reality we all live in…
And then there’s Care. Our purpose is to help every family at each stage of care and today, we’re helping millions of families at home and at work across 17+ countries and growing.
Start your free search for care in your area. Care for all you love.
🇲🇱
Mali | Intelligence & security
The US has accidentally been leaking info to Mali for a decade
A simple typo has resulted in millions of sensitive US military emails ending up in Mali, according to
The Financial Times
.
How?
For a decade, many US military folks intending to send emails to .mil addresses (the suffix for the US military) have accidentally sent them to .ml, the suffix for Mali. And until yesterday (Monday), Mali’s .ml domain was managed by a Dutch consultant, who tried to warn the Pentagon.
But now that Russia-aligned Mali has resumed control of the .ml domain again, it potentially has access to information like:
📜
Staffing lists at US bases
🎖️ The travel plans for the US Army’s highest-ranking officer, and
✈️ Even corrosion problems impacting Australian F-35s.
Intrigue’s take:
We didn’t need a reminder, but we got one anyway: national security systems can actually be pretty fragile, because ultimately they’re made up of people. And people make mistakes. Big ones.
Also worth noting:
Reportedly, none of the information sent to Mali was classified (such info is typically sent through separate encrypted systems).
Unclassified info can still offer valuable insights to an adversary.
🎧 Today on
Intrigue Outloud
A wheat field in Ukraine’s Kherson region. Credits: Alexander Ermochenko/Reuters
Why is Russia pulling out of the Black Sea Grain Deal with Ukraine?
Find out here!
➕
Extra Intrigue
We’re very online, so you don’t have to be.
Can the US and China cooperate on climate?
Finding dry land in Kherson
Why are Georgian politicians going after gay rights?
‘Oppenheimer’ is a warning for Silicon Valley
Cameroon’s divisions could turn dangerous
🗳️ Poll time!
Are you open to new job opportunities?
🏃 Yes, get me out of here
🤷 Eh, I'm casually browsing
😎 No, I love my job
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
An Intrigue Job Board would be...
🥰 Fantastic! I need more international/intriguing roles
👍 Fine, but I'm not looking for anything
🤓 Useless, that's what LinkedIn is for
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
And finally, a
special poll
for our podcast listeners!
Despite his Wimbledon loss, is Novak Djokovic the greatest male athlete ever? If not, who is?
🎾 Djokovic
🏀 Michael Jordan
⚽ Lionel Messi
⛳ Tiger Woods
🏒 Wayne Gretzky
🏃‍♂️ Usain Bolt
⛸️ Yuzuru Hanyu
✍️ Someone else (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
We’ll be running our female greatest-of-all-time poll next
🙂
📊
Chart of the day
Data: Politico, 13 July 2023.
Spaniards will head to the polls this Sunday after Prime Minister Pedro Sánchez called a snap election. It’s looking like a possible win for the centre-right opposition People’s Party, with Sánchez’s incumbent Socialist Party trailing. But either way, the polls suggest a coalition government will emerge.
Yesterday’s poll:
If you were the leader of your own imaginary country, which world power would you want on your side, and why?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🇺🇸
US   (65%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇨🇳
China (9%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇬🇧
UK (2%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇮🇳
India (5%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇫🇷
France (2%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇹🇷
Turkey (1%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇧🇷
Brazil (0.4%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇩🇪
Germany  (9%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇯🇵
Japan (3%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!) (3%)
Your two cents
:
🇺🇸
S:
“We (the US) are powerful and somewhat chaotic. I'm not saying we make great allies, but I think we'd make extremely stressful adversaries.”
🇮🇳
A.G:
“I would definitely go with India. Population increment, high technology development (even space development), south-south cooperation, and leaders of relevant global south needs. I mean, why not?”
🇧🇷
J.S:
“Future relies on material resources and big, unified countries to make agile decisions.”
✍️
M.M
: “It's too hard to choose in a vacuum, would depend on where my country is located, what its political system is, what drives its economy, what its security capability is etc.”