URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/the-real-story-behind-ukraine-s-elections
Title: 🌍 The real story behind Ukraine’s elections

Today’s briefing:
— The real story behind Ukraine’s elections
— World’s most-downloaded app is…
— Italy’s massive new flex
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. I’m always so impressed when I meet Intrigue readers from around the world. Granted, I’m probably heavily biased, but I’m always blown away by the diversity of professional backgrounds and personal interests of fellow Intriguers.
Just last night at our Sydney happy hour, I met a bunch of readers from Down Under who worked in fields ranging from security studies to documentary filmmaking and software engineering. And, of course, there was a token attorney for good measure.
We discussed a whole bunch of stuff, including the complexity of Ukraine’s religious groups and its alleged infiltration by foreign actors back in the day. Anyway, that’s on my mind as we dive into today’s top story on
Ukraine’s (potential) elections.
Tweet of the day
Tweeted by the US ambassador to Japan (@USAmbJapan)
Japan had been pushing for more US support amid
the latest China-Japan spat
, triggered after PM Takaichi told her parliament that a future Chinese invasion of Taiwan could constitute a “
survival-threatening situation
” for Japan. Tokyo won’t be too relieved by the above US response, coming a month later and only at the spokesperson level.
Oh, the stories the headlines tell
Today’s story is about Ukraine — inside Ukraine, concerning Ukraine. If you Ctrl-F this story, you might find “
Ukraine
” mentioned more than the country invading it (Russia). Which might be a certain someone’s exact intention, but we’ll get to that.
But why today’s Ukraine focus? President Zelensky has suddenly announced Ukraine could hold elections within 60-90 days…
if
the US and other partners guarantee security.
So first, why now?
Good opening question, dear reader.
To start, it’s the pressure.
President Trump used
an interview
on Monday to suggest Zelensky is "
using war not to hold an election
". Putin (who has killed, jailed, or exiled any opposition) has long argued this same point, seeking to declare Zelensky illegitimate.
It’s also the context.
You’ll recall Zelensky has been dealing with
a massive corruption scandal
, which might give credence to the idea that folks want change at the top.
Then, the reaction.
Rather than repeat his past answers about Ukraine’s constitutional ban on elections during martial law, Zelensky has now reframed the debate, confirming he’ll call elections as soon as the US provides the necessary security (more on that below).
Second, how would elections even work?
There are now an estimated five million Ukrainian refugees abroad, four million displaced internally, three million under Russian occupation, and another million defending their homeland in the trenches. That’s almost
a third
of Ukraine’s population
facing some massive if not insurmountable obstacles to voting.
Then for everyone else, there’s the question of how you actually get to the voting booth (or run an election campaign) while a certain someone is still launching
300-500
missile and drone strikes at you each day, which gets us to…
Third, which security guarantees, exactly?
Zelensky is pointing out that Russia should stop attacking Ukraine during the election, which means either
a
) Putin accepting a ceasefire, or
b
) Trump imposing one on him.
Yet neither of those things has happened, or even come close. In fact,
depending on how you count it, Putin has rejected (and Zelensky has accepted) all
six US ceasefire calls
this year.
As for Putin’s demands that Ukraine cede more (unconquered) land? Rather than credible offers, these seem like
rhetorical ploys
to keep framing Ukraine as the obstacle to peace.
And therein lies
the fundamental contradiction
Zelensky is seeking to highlight here: Russia (and now the US) are pushing for elections, while either creating (Putin) or acquiescing to (Trump) the very conditions that make elections impossible.
Anyway, let’s pretend an election somehow comes together, then…
Fourth, who would actually win?
One of the few things all Ukrainians seem to agree on right now is they don’t actually want wartime elections, which themselves poll at barely 10%.
But let’s say Ukraine figured out all the above logistical, constitutional, and security challenges, the latest credible polling suggests it’d then be a tight race between the top-polling (if flagging)
Zelensky
himself, and… his own
former top commander, Zaluzhny!
That
popular ex-general
has criticised his president’s strategy (hence the exile to London as ambassador), but his bottom line is the same:
"
Peace on Russia’s terms is not peace; it’s capitulation.
" Plus, he not only opposes wartime elections, but says he has no plans to run.
Oh, and guess who polls in a distant third place? Zelensky’s popular spymaster,
Budanov
.
So democracies are funny and sometimes divisive things, but based on current polling, Zelensky either wins re-election, or gets replaced by someone just like him.
So…
Finally… why are we even talking about this?
Now we’re at the core! Why push for elections that are either impossible or would just ratify if not harden the status quo?
We can only guess at Trump’s thinking, but Putin clearly doesn’t
want
elections. Think of the contrast: once his Ukrainian foe gets (re)legitimised at an actual competitive ballot box, then
what does that make Putin?
Rather, Putin’s sudden concern for Ukrainian democracy is about destabilising Ukraine, delegitimising its leader at home and abroad, putting Ukraine back on narrative defence, and shifting attention away from Putin’s own nightly hits on Ukrainian homes.
So, while this big Ukrainian election question is dominating the headlines right now, maybe the bigger question is…
should
it?
Intrigue’s Take
We said this briefing was about Ukraine, but it’s about something else, too: any fight plays out not just on the battlefield, but across broader arenas, like…
Perception
: Ukraine’s early info strategy managed to cast this as David vs Goliath, but Russia’s current inforwar strategy is classic DARVO (Deny, Attack, Reverse Victim and Offender roles). That perception battle helps shape…
Legitimacy
: This concept keeps evolving, particularly amid a broader shift towards what some dub competitive authoritarianism — a kind of pageantry that seeks to legitimise power, absent any genuine competition. And that enables…
Judo
: We’re left in this bizarro world of despots using the momentum of a rival’s own democratic ideals — whether elections or free speech — against them.
And that, dear Intriguer, all places media — including your favourite ex-diplomats — in a tricky spot. But the advantage of doing our own thing means we not only have the freedom to structure an entire counterterrorism piece using Taylor Swift lyrics, but can continue to shine a light on our world’s authoritarian judo.
Sound even smarter:
The
latest polling
suggests 62% of Americans want Ukraine’s self-defence to prevail, and  64% support sending US weapons (up 9 points from last year).
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
Up or down?
China’s stats bureau has reported an acceleration in consumer inflation (CPI) to a near two-year high of 0.75% (yoy), driven mainly by rising food prices. Meanwhile, inflation’s
producer
side (PPI) has slumped -2.2%, recording its 38th straight drop. (
CNBC
)
Comment:
The big question is whether this CPI bump will impact China’s mooted plans to ramp up policy support in 2026, getting its next five-year plan period off to a strong start. And our answer is… no — pork prices can rise or fall, but this data set suggests China’s deeper problem (deflation) is still not going anywhere.
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
Another cut.
International markets have offered mixed reactions to the Fed’s third successive rate cut, partly because this was widely priced in already, but also because the Fed board itself still seemed divided and brought a hawkish undertone. (
WSJ
$)
Comment:
The bit that really caught our eye was Powell’s remarks about AI, effectively suggesting the tech is boosting productivity but not (yet) seriously disrupting the labour market. One example doing the rounds is in radiology, which has *increased
*
its hiring despite it widely being seen as highly AI-vulnerable.
🇻🇪
VENEZUELA
-
Nobel laureate reaches Oslo.
Nobel Peace Prize winner and Venezuelan opposition figure María Corina Machado has landed in Oslo after a daring journey defying the Venezuelan dictator’s decade-long travel ban. According to reports, she wore a disguise to pass through military checkpoints, and used a wooden skiff to sail away in a plan facilitated by a local network and the US. The saga meant she unexpectedly missed Wednesday’s Nobel ceremony in Oslo, with her daughter accepting the prize on her behalf instead.  (
CNN
)
Comment
: Meanwhile, the US continues to pressure the Maduro regime, reportedly seizing an unspecified oil tanker off Venezuela’s coast, and lapping two F18s over the Gulf of Venezuela (though reportedly without breaching Venezuelan airspace). It looks like a continued ratcheting up of pressure to force Maduro out.
🇲🇽
MEXICO
-
Tariffs announced.
Lawmakers have approved tariffs ranging from 5-50% on over 1,400 imports, mainly from Asian countries including China, Indonesia, and India. (
Independent
)
Comment
: The move could be aimed at facilitating trade negotiations between the US and Mexico, considering the Trump administration had previously flagged concerns about Chinese imports bypassing US tariffs through Mexico.
🇮🇸
ICELAND
-
More boycotts.
Iceland has announced it’ll join Spain, the Netherlands, Ireland, and Slovenia in boycotting next year’s Eurovision song contest, after the organisers cleared Israel’s participation last week. Flagged after October’s US-brokered ceasefire, these boycotts protest Israel’s actions in Gaza. Meanwhile, the organisers are emphasising Eurovision’s apolitical nature, with ~35 countries still participating. (
Reuters
)
🇮🇩
INDONESIA
-
Nuclear friendship.
The president (Prabowo) just visited Putin in Russia for the third time in ~18 months, reportedly to discuss defence ties, wheat exports, and the possibility of the Russians helping Indonesia build its first nuclear power plant by 2032. (
AA
)
Comment
: The ex-general Prabowo swept to power on promises to lead a more active and independent Indonesia on the world stage — it’s looking a bit like “pulling a Modi” at this point: one week he’s visiting US ally Australia to announce a major upgrade to defence ties; the next, he’s talking up defence ties in Moscow.
🇰🇷
SOUTH KOREA
-
Epic leak.
Authorities are now investigating a massive data leak at e-commerce giant Coupang, impacting nearly two-thirds of South Korea’s population and triggering police raids at the company’s Seoul headquarters. The alleged culprit, a former employee from China, remains at large. (
France24
)
🇨🇩
DR CONGO
-
What ceasefire?
Days after the leaders of Rwanda and Congo signed a US-pushed peace deal at DC’s newly renamed Donald J Trump Institute of Peace (né USIP), the Rwanda-backed M23 armed group has now captured the eastern Congolese city of Uvira. (
AfricaNews
)
Comment
: It’s a reminder that no amount of signing ceremonies or photo opps can replace the painstaking work of tackling a conflict’s underlying drivers, which clearly persist not only between DRC and Rwanda, but also Thailand and Cambodia.
Extra Intrigue
Meanwhile, in other worlds…
Tech
: Unsurprisingly,
ChatGPT is America’s most downloaded app
of 2025.
Fashion
: Organisers have announced Beyoncé, Venus Williams, and Nicole Kidman as the next
co-hosts of the Met Gala
, fashion’s night of nights.
Space
: Elon Musk’s SpaceX is moving ahead with
plans for a 2026 IPO
, hoping to break Saudi Aramco’s $29B record raise at a valuation of over $1T.
Announcement of the day
Countries often squabble over who first invented döner or humus or yeesang or jollof.
But now Italy has pulled the ultimate power move and told everyone to hold its Peroni, getting UNESCO to declare
the entirety of Italian cuisine
“
intangible cultural heritage
”.
This world first has delighted many Italians, but none more than Prime Minister Giorgia Meloni, whose government has reinforced Italy’s culinary image as a way to drum up a bit of nationalism at home while boosting Italy’s soft power (and tourism appeal) abroad.
Meanwhile, and you might not’ve noticed behind Italy’s epic flex above, but UNESCO also honoured
Egypt’s
koshary
dish made with rice, pasta, black lentils and fried onions.
But omg move aside koshary because wow look Italy just did a sweet triple back flip wow.
Today’s poll
Do you think Ukraine should hold elections soon?
🗳️ Yes, despite all the hurdles it's needed
⛔ No, it's neither feasible nor helpful
🤔 Not right now, but right after a ceasefire/ deal
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Who do you think will win this bid to buy Warner Bros?
💻 Netflix (41%)
📺 Paramount (57%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (2%)
Your two cents:
📺
H:
“Due to Trump's personal relationships with the Ellison family (and Jared Kushner) the transactional president is bound to profit from this deal”
✍️
S:
“Regulatory pressure (US and international) will cause a piecemeal distribution of WB assets between the players and perhaps some independent units. It will take years to sort out.”
✍️
E.K.H:
“Streaming is one of those few industries where consolidation can actually be good for the consumer, with more titles available through fewer subscriptions. So I'm going to say all of us.”