URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/the-pope-frontrunners-03a004e6f89b9b1b
Title: 🌍 The pope frontrunners

Today’s briefing:
— The pope frontrunners
— Merz stumbles at final hurdle
— A mystery new airport exhibit
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. There’s an ol’ saying that
"he who enters the conclave as pope, leaves it as a cardinal."
It reflects the fact that frontrunners don’t always emerge as pope — in fact, that’s happened just twice in the last 60 years.
It’s maybe a reminder that we’re human, and we’re prone to the kinds of evolving alliances, philosophies, and surprises we’re bound to see this week, as
the Vatican’s conclave gathers to elect the next pope
— our briefing for today.
Number of the day
6
That’s the number of votes by which
Friedrich Merz just failed to become Germany’s next chancellor
, in a historic first (today’s parliamentary ballot was expected to run smoothly). It’s unclear who defected from his camp. The Bundestag now has 14 days to elect a candidate with an absolute majority: Merz can try again, but so can others.
Who’ll be the next pope?
As the sun rises over the Eternal City tomorrow (Wednesday), 133 cardinals from 71 countries will shuffle into the Michelangelo-painted Sistine Chapel to elect the next pope.
They’ll be cut off from the outside,
voting
once in the afternoon of 7 May and then twice each morning and afternoon thereafter until a two-thirds majority elects the next pope.
The whole thing
can last days
(shout-out to the two cardinals who’ve already called in sick), but statistically speaking, we
should
have a new pope this week
.
So, who are the front-runners to lead the world’s smallest sovereign state and largest single religious institution? Let’s run a quick breakdown by region:
Europe
The ‘Old Continent’ is home to the largest number of eligible cardinals, dubbed ‘papabile’ (Italian for ‘pope-able’). And while the Vatican has the world’s highest per-capita number of Bloomberg terminals, they’re
eligible
more in the ‘theological’ and ‘leadership’ sense:
Pietro Parolin
:
he’s secretary of state (second in charge), so an obvious frontrunner, though this has its downsides (ask Hillary). He’s also copped flak for
“selling out”
China’s Catholics
via the
2018 deal
that empowered the Communist Party to appoint local bishops (with the pope relegated to a veto).
Pierbattista Pizzaballa
:
relatively young at 60, he was always destined for buzz with a name like that. Say it out loud, and you’ll be transported back to that time you fell in love while strolling Cinque Terre. Fluent in Hebrew (though not Arabic), he’s Patriarch of Jerusalem and has focused on interfaith dialogue, the plight of Christians, and de-escalation (he offered to swap himself for the Hamas hostages).
Africa
A New York archbishop once quipped he needed an atlas every time Pope Francis appointed a new cardinal, including firsts in places like Cape Verde.
Fridolin Ambongo Besungu
is the continent’s frontrunner, serving as archbishop of Kinshasa (Congo) and gaining a global profile for his fierce criticism of corruption and mining, while maintaining a traditional streak on social issues.
One way or another, he’s seen as a kingmaker (14% of the votes now hail from Africa).
Asia
Luis Antonio Gokim Tagle
has his own YouTube show plus relatively youthful vibes, earning the
‘Asian Francis’
nickname for his modern approach, though this might’ve alienated some of the more old-school types he’ll need to win over.
And yes, there are also ‘papabiles’ from the Americas and Oceania, but none seem to be gaining any traction. If one ends up pope, Intrigue will buy you a drink some time.
Intrigue’s Take
If you haven’t seen the films
Two Popes
or
Conclave
, they get the coveted Intrigue rubber stamp of approval, which is something we just made up. They’re surprisingly thoughtful and at times profound films exploring themes the West too often avoids.
But why cover any of this? We’ll answer that with some quotes from the films themselves:
“
Truth may be vital, but without love, it is unbearable
” (Two Popes)
A Vatican diplomat once quipped that while most embassies focus on interests, the Vatican’s nunciatures (embassies) focus on
values
(notwithstanding the church’s sins)
.
That means they pop up in some surprising places, and can carry some surprising influence.
“
They say eavesdroppers can use lasers to read the vibrations of the glass
” (Conclave)
This line is a passing nod to the counterespionage measures the Vatican (like every other state) must take to keep its deliberations secret. And yes, you can bet spooks will track this process closely for any insight into how this ancient body might harm their interests.
“
Certainty is the great enemy of unity
” (Conclave)
As social, political, and technological forces accelerate, we see a world that’s in many ways getting
less
certain, not more. And that’ll grant the Vatican (and other traditional sources of influence)
more
influence, not less.
Sound even smarter:
Other names doing the rounds include
Matteo Zuppi
(a top Vatican diplomat), Hungary’s
Peter Erdo
(who famously defied the Soviets), and France’s
Jean-Marc Aveline
(a media favourite due to his striking resemblance to a beloved ex-pope).
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
BOXABL.
Could This Company Do for Housing What Tesla Did for Cars?
Most car factories like Ford or Tesla reportedly build one car per minute. Isn’t it time we do that for houses? BOXABL believes they have the potential to disrupt a massive and outdated trillion dollar building construction market.
Following an initial prototype order from SpaceX as well as an order for 156 homes from the DoD, BOXABL has made substantial strides in streamlining their assembly line automated manufacturing and order process. They just reserved the ticker symbol BXBL on Nasdaq*
BOXABL has raised over $170M from over 40,000 investors since 2020. To date, Boxabl raised over 50% of their Reg A+ funding limit! BOXABL is only accepting investment on their website until the Reg A+ is full.
Invest now
before it’s too late!
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES - OpenAI ditches ‘for-profit’ plans.
OpenAI has abandoned its controversial plans to shift its ChatGPT business under a for-profit board, instead transforming it into a public-benefit corporation. (
CNN
)
Comment:
It’s unclear whether this’ll satisfy OpenAI’s newest investors, who’d conditioned their billions on a successful restructuring.
🇮🇱
ISRAEL - Security cabinet backs plan to capture Gaza.
Israel is calling up tens of thousands of reservists after leaders approved a plan to seize all of Gaza. Netanyahu is billing it as an expanded operation to defeat Hamas, though hostage families and humanitarian agencies are opposed. (
NBC
)
🇨🇳
CHINA - Firms ‘washing’ their exports to dodge US tariffs.
China’s social media is awash with offers to help exporters ship to third countries like Malaysia, where they get a new label before on-forwarding to the US. (
FT
$)
Comment:
As with anything, tax too high and a black market emerges. You need cooperation from local authorities, but they might not be in a cooperating mood.
🇰🇷
SOUTH KOREA -
Conservative party picks candidate.
The ruling party has picked hardline former labour minister Kim Moon-soo to run in the 3 June elections to replace Korea’s impeached president. (
Guardian
)
Comment
: They can pick who they like, but it’s the opposition’s popular and populist-lite Lee Jae-myung who looks set to inherit Korea’s polarised politics and economy.
🇷🇴
ROMANIA
-
Populist-right wins first round.
Nationalist George Simion has won Sunday’s first-round presidential elections, after a court famously banned his predecessor over alleged Russian links. He now faces the centrist but anti-establishment mayor of Bucharest in a May 18 runoff. (
BBC
)
Comment
: The Ukraine-sceptic Simion might soon be ruling a NATO ally, rattling neighbouring Ukraine (which has banned him). This is partly the result of an electoral system that splits the centre, but also the result of a political class that’s lost credibility.
🇮🇩
INDONESIA - Regulators halt Sam Altman’s biometric ID project.
Jakarta has suspended the ChatGPT CEO’s biometric ID project
World
, after alleged violations of local regulations. The company has hit several regulatory hurdles in its global rollout, with bans or restrictions across Germany, Brazil, and Kenya. (
Decrypt
)
🇺🇸
USA - Trump unveils 100% movie tariffs.
President Trump has unveiled plans to impose 100% tariffs on films shot abroad, arguing foreign tax incentives are luring studio productions away from Hollywood. US media stocks slid on the news. (
Hollywood Reporter
)
🇦🇪
UAE - Top UN court dismisses Sudan case against UAE.
The ICJ’s dismissal of Sudan’s genocide case was due to a technical UAE carveout, rather than any ruling on the merits. Sudan argues the Emiratis are breaching the genocide convention by arming the notorious RSF paramilitary. (
AfricaNews
)
Extra Intrigue
What people around the world are googling:
Folks in
🇵🇪
Peru
looked up ‘estado de sitio’ (
state of emergency
) after a regional government sounded the alarm over the
murder of 13 kidnapped miners
.
🇦🇺
Aussies
googled New York’s famous ‘
Met Gala
’ to follow their
favourite red carpet looks
.
And
🇩🇪
German
racecar fans searched for ‘
Jochen Mass
’ after news broke that the nation’s
F1 hero has passed away
, aged 78.
From our friends
Want to get smarter about financial markets?
Join 200,000 investors who get Opening Bell Daily in their inbox — it’s packed with Wall Street data and analysis you won’t find anywhere else.
Subscribe free.
Airport of the day
Credits: Wellington Airport
Wellington Airport features some pretty rad
Lord of the Rings
-inspired giant eagles welcoming weary travellers to
Middle Earth
New Zealand. But word is they’ll soon be replaced with a new mystery exhibit. Maybe a huge black tower with a fiery eye?!
Today’s poll
What do you think has the most influence on the papal election?
🌍 Regional dynamics
🇻🇦 Internal dynamics
🕊️ Religious considerations
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Why do you think Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway is sitting on so much cash right now?
💲
Stocks are over-priced (30%)
🔥
The world is too volatile (68%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (2%)
Your two cents:
🔥
M.C:
“It seems like the economic instability worldwide might warrant a little caution. Rules are being changed in unnerving ways.”
💲
E:
“He's been sitting on this cash for years now so that tells me it's more an issue of overpriced stocks rather than just geopolitics.”
✍️
R.R:
“He’s waiting for a recession to make stocks a bargain. It’s one of his strategies. And he has been very successful.”
✍️
A.C:
“He's about to retire, and he wants his successor to make the next investment decision.”