URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/saudis-nudge-russoukraine-peace-talks-forward
Title: 🌍 The Saudis nudge Russo-Ukraine peace talks forward

Today’s newsletter supported by:
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Want some sweet Intrigue merch? An Intrigue mug or carry-on bag, perhaps? It’s easy! Just share the intrigue with friends or colleagues, using your unique code at the end of this newsletter! Our sincere thanks to Chithi, Anna, IPD, Sebastian, MTH, and Varij, who’ve already been leading the charge (and have some intriguing perks headed their way).
Today’s briefing is a 5 min read:
🇷🇺
-
🇺🇦
The Saudis nudge
Russo-Ukraine War
talks forward.
🇦🇺
Australia
and China patch things up.
➕
Plus:
The world’s first female prime minister, how the papers are covering the return of India’s opposition leader, and why you should keep a close eye on real estate agents in Canada.
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇵🇰
Pakistan
: A local court has
sentenced former prime minister
and cricket star Imran Khan to a three-year jail term on allegations he sold state gifts for a ~$500k profit. His lawyers say the case was politically motivated ahead of general elections due later this year.
🇱🇹
Lithuania
: Over 1,000 Russians and Belarusians living in Lithuania have been declared
national security risks
and will have to leave the country. There are around 74,000 Russians and Belarusians living in Lithuania.
🇵🇦
Panama
: The Panama Canal Authority expects
revenue to fall by $200M
next year due to an ongoing drought. Administrators say the rainfall that feeds the canal has declined so steeply that they’ll have to reduce the number of daily ships from 38 to 32.
🇪🇹
Ethiopia
: Authorities have declared a
state of emergency in Amhara
State, home to ~22 million people, amid clashes between the military and rebel groups. Ethiopia last declared a state of emergency in 2021-22 during the war in Tigray.
🇳🇿
New Zealand
: The defence ministry delivered its
first-ever national security strategy
on Friday. The document describes a more “
assertive
” China, and calls for greater defence spending plus closer security ties with Australia and the US.
🇷🇺
-
🇺🇦
Russo-Ukraine War | Peace talks
Reps from ~40 nations gathered in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia over the weekend
The Saudis nudge peace talks forward
Saudi Arabia hosted the latest peace talks on the Russo-Ukraine War over the weekend. They were informal discussions rather than peace negotiations, producing some interesting insights rather than any major breakthroughs.
Around 40 nations took part, including China, which skipped an earlier summit and has resisted calls to condemn Russia. Russia itself wasn't invited.
Why did Saudi Arabia play host?
🤝
It still enjoys functional ties with all the major players, having helped to negotiate
prisoner swaps
, backed Ukraine in
UN resolutions
, and assisted Russia with
higher oil prices
, plus
👼
For Riyadh, playing host also helps revive its reputation and cement its position as both a regional leader and global player.
So what actually happened?
🌏 More than twice as many countries participated in these Jeddah talks compared to the
June gathering in Copenhagen
🇺🇳
There was also more common ground this time around, with participants (including all BRICS members except Russia) reportedly taking a pretty productive approach, and
🇨🇳
China also gave its own peace plan another run, prompting France and others to push back (the plan involves a ceasefire that critics say would allow Russia to consolidate its gains in Ukraine).
So what’s next?
The idea is now for various working groups to continue the discussions. If they make enough progress, there’s the
possibility
of a leader-level summit to endorse some key principles for ending the war.
Intrigue's take:
If this all sounds convoluted, that’s because it is. But that’s also how diplomacy works: any meaningful engagement between world leaders is generally the culmination of arduous talks at more junior levels.
So looking ahead, direct Moscow-Kyiv negotiations still seem remote. But there’s a chance this Jeddah process could produce practical ideas in the meantime, on issues like nuclear safety, prisoner returns, and wheat exports. Russia would then face the choice of playing ball, or isolating itself further.
Also worth noting:
Ukraine
described
the talks as “
an extremely honest, open conversation
”. The Kremlin
said
“
any attempt to promote a peaceful settlement deserves a positive evaluation
”, while Russia’s foreign ministry described the talks as a “
hoax
”, and “
doomed
”.
On the final day of the talks yesterday (Sunday), Russia mounted a
large missile and drone attack on Ukraine
, following Ukraine’s drone attack on a Russian oil tanker in the Kerch Strait.
📰
How newspapers covered…
India’s top court suspending a defamation conviction against the main opposition leader
Lahore, Pakistan
“India’s top court suspends Rahul Gandhi’s defamation conviction”
London, UK
“Rahul Gandhi set to return to parliament as top court suspends conviction”
Mumbai, India
“Modi surname case: Truth always triumphs, says Rahul Gandhi on Supreme Court verdict”
Today’s newsletter is supported by: Vinovest
A bottle a day keeps market volatility at bay.
Investing in wine and whiskey has become a savvy strategy for diversifying one's portfolio, safeguarding against market volatility and inflation, and protecting one's wealth. Not only did wine handily outperform all of the major stock indices, but it also bested Bitcoin (-65%), gold (0.4%), and bonds (-12.9%) plus it has a fraction of the risk and volatility. Whiskey has shown assets growing by over 560% in the last decade, making it an increasingly popular choice for investors.
Enter Vinovest, a leading platform in the industry, providing a vast selection of investment-grade wines and whiskies for both novice and seasoned investors. Their platform is designed to make investing in the best wines and whiskies from around the world as seamless and stress-free as possible, with a minimum investment of just $1,750.
Discover Wine and Whiskey Investing Today!
🇦🇺
Australia | Geo-economics
China removes tariffs on Australian barley
Australia has
said
it’ll end a case against China at the World Trade Organization, after Beijing agreed to lift its tariffs on Australian barley.
China imposed various tariffs
on Australian goods in 2020 after Canberra called for an international investigation into the origins of Covid-19. But Australia stood its ground and called the tariffs “
economic coercion
”.
After a new Australian government ushered in a “
stabilisation
” of China relations last year, speculation grew that Beijing might hit
ctrl-z
on its tariffs. That’s now happened with barley, and Australia is
hoping
wine is next.
Intrigue’s take:
While painful for specific producers, Australia’s economy mostly shrugged off the tariffs imposed by its largest trade partner. That’s partly because barley growers found new markets to hawk their grain.
But it’s also partly because China kept buying
vast
quantities of Australia’s top export: iron ore. So the immediate story here may be one of resilience. But there’s a longer term story here about vulnerability, too.
Also worth noting:
Australian barley has mainly been used in animal feed and beer production in China.
As tensions between Australia and China escalated in 2020, China’s embassy passed to the Australian media a
list of 14 ‘grievances’
that Beijing had with Canberra.
➕
Extra Intrigue
Your weekly roundup of the world’s more surprising news:
Somalia’s sports minister has apologised after the country sent an
unprepared runner
to the World University Games in China, recording a “
slowest ever
” 100m sprint that went viral.
A zoo in China has clarified that its bears are in fact animals and
not people in fur suits
.
A US brewery company has launched a
beer made from recycled shower water
.
Toy company Mattel is looking for a ‘
Chief UNO Player
’ to launch its new UNO expansion pack.
And, a real estate agent in Canada has been fined $20k after CCTV footage caught him
chugging a homeowner’s milk
.
🗳️ Poll time!
Are tariffs ever a justifiable trade tool?
⚖️ Yes, if domestic producers can't compete
📖 Yes, if a trade partner is violating rules
🏚️ No, they make everyone less well off
✍️ Other (write-in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
🧑
Profile of the day
Credits: National Portrait Gallery
Sirimavo Bandaranaike
became the world’s first elected female prime minister in 1960, after her party won elections in Ceylon/Sri Lanka (the country changed its name in 1972). Bandaranaike entered politics after her husband - the then sitting prime minister - was assassinated. She went on to serve as PM three times (1960-65, 1970-77 and 1994-2000), before passing away in 2000.
Thursday’s poll:
Do you think social media companies should pay publications for the articles that appear on their platforms?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
💵
Yes, it seems only fair (64%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️
🙅
No, the exposure and traffic should be enough  (33%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!)  (3%)
Your two cents
:
🙅
J.B:
“Outlets literally pay advertising money to get more traffic. Now they think Facebook should pay THEM to send traffic to their site?”
💵
C.M:
“‘It’s good exposure.’ Those of us who live in Canada know you can die of exposure.”