URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/the-trump-putin-summit-who-wins-1d9555da45d4581f
Title: 🌍 The Trump-Putin summit: who wins?

Today’s briefing:
— The Trump-Putin summit: who wins?
— Don’t bring your kid to
this
work
— A diplomat-themed chocolate
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. When Intrigue is cashed-up enough to withstand the lawsuit, I’ll tell you the amazing true tale of the inebriated ambassador who got arrested for impersonating an ambassador.
But until then, we need to talk about Friday’s upcoming
Trump-Putin summit
in Alaska.
Number of the day
15%
That’s the percentage of China revenues Nvidia and AMD reportedly agreed to pay DC in return for the Trump administration’s greenlight to resume certain chip sales to China — a pretty unusual arrangement. We
wondered
at the time what deal might’ve been done.
Trump to host Putin
Let's get you a quick primer ahead of this Friday's surprise Trump-Putin summit in Alaska.
Why now?
Trump made the
announcement
on Friday, the same day his
peace-or-sanctions
deadline on Putin was set to expire. It was a response to a proposal Putin relayed to Trump's envoy (Witkoff) in Moscow on Wednesday.
✌️
Proposal
✌️ might be a bit generous, and there's some confusion on the details (Witkoff doesn't usually bring embassy note-takers with him), but Putin seems to be demanding…
a)
Ukraine
's withdrawal from its own (fortified) Luhansk and Donetsk regions plus broad recognition of all Putin's illegal annexations, in return for
b)
Putin
ceasing his attacks on Ukraine's Kherson and Zaporizhzhia regions.
Kremlin aides are pushing back on reports of any possible ‘
land swap
' (which might’ve stemmed from a Witkoff misunderstanding) — to the contrary, word is Putin is offering no withdrawal, and his aims seem unchanged (a disarmed, neutral, and pliant Ukraine).
So let's take a quick world tour to see how this looks for each leader, starting with…
🇷🇺
Putin
If true, this is shaping up as
a dream outcome
for Putin. He's "
offering
" something he himself desperately needs: a pause after barely taking 0.6% of Ukraine's territory last year at staggering cost. And in return, he’s
demanding
something that 1,265 days and a million Russian casualties haven't yet achieved: full control of Ukraine’s Donbas.
On top of that, Putin also gets:
a
) the
credibility
of a meeting with a US president, that's
b
) taking place not just on any
US soil
, but specifically on
c
) turf Russia once sold to the US — ie, living proof that
borders change
(some Russian nationalists want Alaska back).
White House officials have flagged
Ukraine's Zelensky could join too
, though the Kremlin is rejecting that until “
certain conditions
” are met. So rather than (say) the White House using a POTUS meeting as a carrot to bring parties together, Putin wants Friday to…
d
)
sideline
Ukraine and its European allies
e
)
cast
Ukraine's self-defence as the obstacle to Trump's peace dream, and so…
f
) again
avoid
US sanctions, while maybe further eroding US support for Ukraine.
It's hard to see any cons for the Kremlin here, perhaps because most cons are for...
🇺🇦
Zelensky
The Ukrainian president is choosing his words carefully to avoid getting re-painted as the problem here, but Putin is making demands he knows Zelensky can’t accept.
It’s
a calculated wedge
, dividing Zelensky between
a
) Ukraine’s own major constitutional and political hurdles to ceding land, and yet
b
) a chunk of Ukraine’s own population really also just wanting the war to end. It also withholds the thing Zelensky truly needs: some kind of guarantee Putin won’t just use any pause to re-arm, re-group, then attack again.
Putin hopes this pressure at home, plus any international isolation he can engineer from Alaska, tilts the chessboard back in his favour. So for now, Zelensky is
reiterating
that "
Ukrainians will not gift their land to the occupier
", while seeking support from...
🌍 Europe
Vice President Vance
co-hosted European officials
at the UK’s Chevening House on Saturday, leading to a
joint statement
from seven European leaders mostly reiterating their existing support for Ukraine, though including this intriguing line: "
Meaningful negotiations can only take place in the context of a ceasefire or reduction of hostilities.
"
Translation
: a ceasefire is not some Russian bargaining chip to extract more Ukrainian land, but rather a precondition for any meaningful negotiations to even take place.
Behind closed doors, the Europeans are again reportedly urging that any turf concessions must be
reciprocal
, and backed by meaningful security guarantees for Ukraine.
So all in all, it seems we’re now hurtling towards a leader summit despite leader positions remaining unchanged.
Intrigue’s Take
The US president has notched up a few
peace-making wins
this year, whether on India-Pakistan, Rwanda-DRC, or Friday’s big Armenia-Azerbaijan news (the Zangezur corridor we
foreshadowed
is now the
Trump Route for International Peace and Prosperity).
But the ultimate prizes have always been
a
) Arab-Israeli normalisation, and
b
) a Russo-Ukraine peace. Prize a) now looks out of reach with Bibi expanding back across Gaza, leaving only prize b), which Trump famously pledged to deliver within 24 hours. But instead, Putin has now
doubled
his air attacks as his vaunted summer offensive stumbles.
So if nobody’s positions are shifting ahead of Friday’s Alaska summit,
why host?
Setting aside any Witkoff misunderstanding, it’s possible the US president sees Friday's summit as validation of both
a
) his peace-maker branding, and
b
) his determination to just stop the killing. He might also hope (as he’s voiced before) that by sheer force of personality or connection, he could shake something loose out of Putin.
As for the venue choice?
Maybe he sees Alaska more as a US flex, a halfway point, or perhaps even a step short of a full invite to (say) the White House.
But these are all maybes. In the meantime, and with details still evolving every hour, the available info suggests Friday’s summit is shaping up as a win for Putin more than anyone else.
Sound even smarter:
It's Putin's first US visit since 2015 (for a UN summit), and his first
non-UN
trip state-side since 2007. It'll be Putin's seventh known face-to-face with President Trump (after six meetings during Trump 1.0).
Putin’s last meeting with a US president was in 2021 (with Biden in Geneva).
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇦🇺
AUSTRALIA
-
Us too.
Prime Minister Albanese has announced he’ll join his French, British, Canadian, and Maltese counterparts in recognising a State of Palestine at the UN next month, arguing “
a two-state solution is humanity’s best hope to break the cycle of violence
”. He says the Palestinian Authority has in turn pledged to recognise Israel and exclude Hamas from future governance. Israel’s Netanyahu has labelled Australia’s move a shameful step, with domestic political motives, that rewards Hamas. (
ABC
)
Comment:
Portugal and Luxembourg have also flagged a possible Palestine recognition before the end of 2025. We wrote about this issue
here
.
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
Gone with the wind.
Beijing authorities have detained a senior career diplomat widely tipped as a future foreign minister, Liu Jianchao. It’s only been a couple of years since the last foreign minister Qin Gang disappeared amid allegations of an extramarital affair. (
WSJ
$)
Comment:
Absent any official comment, we can only guess at the reasons here. But as head of the Communist Party’s international department, and a former key figure in President Xi’s anti-corruption drive, Liu’s work has brought him into regular contact not only with foreign governments, but also the inner workings of the Party itself — two high-scrutiny and high-stakes worlds for any Beijing official.
🇹🇩
CHAD
-
Be gone.
A court has jailed the central African country’s opposition leader and former prime minister, Success Masra, for 20 years on charges of incitement to revolt. He rejects the accusations (which stem from May’s deadly clashes) as political. (
AP
)
🇹🇷
TURKEY
-
Shaky ground.
A 6.1 earthquake has collapsed ~16 buildings in northwestern Turkey and left at least one person dead, though avoiding the scale of Turkey’s disastrous 2023 quake. (
CNBC
)
🇧🇾
BELARUS
-
Last dance?
Local dictator and key Putin ally Alexander Lukashenko has suggested he might not seek re-election in 2030, and claims he’s not lining his son up as a successor. (
Anadolu
)
Comment:
We’ve used elliptical words like ‘suggested’ and ‘might’ above, because Lukashenko himself claimed in Friday’s Time Magazine interview that he’s twice tried to step down already, but been forced to stay in power via popular demand. In reality, his last sham re-election in 2020 triggered mass protests across Belarus.
🇨🇱
CHILE
-
Back in business.
Santiago has given the green light for state-owned copper giant Codelco to partially resume operations at its El Teniente mine after last month’s deadly collapse. (
Discovery Alert
)
Comment:
The timing has been brutal for Chile, already dealing with declining ore grades and increased operational costs as its more low-hanging deposits deplete.
🇮🇩
INDONESIA
-
Kangaroo bonds.
Indonesia has started offering Australian dollar-denominated bonds in an effort to diversify its sources of government debt. It’s the world’s second-ever ‘Kangaroo’ bond, after South Korea kicked things off with an Aussie dollar raise in December. (
Bloomberg
$)
Comment:
This latest issuance was over-subscribed 10x, suggesting there’s real investor interest not only in Indonesia’s debt, but also in leveraging Australia’s relatively stable market and currency to mitigate broader global exposures.
Extra Intrigue
🤣
Your weekly roundup of the world’s lighter news
In a
bring-your-kid-to-work-day
all-timer, a Colombian air traffic controller has let his
son give take-off clearance for an aircraft
(before getting suspended).
The US department of agriculture is using audio of Adam Driver and Scarlett Johansson
screaming at each other in a movie
to scare wolves away from livestock.
The Tampa Bay Rays have traded a player to the Yankees…
mid-way through
a game
against the Yankees.
Researchers in Australia have
discovered that the native cockatoo bird
can perform 30 distinct dance-moves (including an impressive headbang).
And it turns out a camper heard
yelling in the Canadian wilderness
wasn’t in distress, but was just singing Nickelback.
Chocolate of the day
Courtesy of Nestlé
After Friday’s feature on the ol’ wood-panelled Dodge ‘Diplomat’ wagon, fellow Intriguer Mateus wrote in from Brazil to let us know it’s not just 1970s-era US carmakers trying to milk diplomacy for a bit of highfalutin brand-power.
Apparently, Nestlé also has a ‘
Diplomata
’ chocolate bar which we are assured does
not
taste like budget cuts or marital stress, but rather creamy milk chocolate with a subtle hint of chocolate and ooooooh infused with
my kids hate me
finely chopped cashew nuts.
Today’s poll
Who do you think is shaping up as the winner from Friday's upcoming Alaska summit?
🇺🇸 Trump
🇷🇺 Putin
🇺🇦 Zelensky
🌍 Europe
✍️ Other (write us!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Last Thursday’s poll:
What do you think global CEOs should focus on most these days?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🧑‍🤝‍🧑
Customers (49%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️
👷
Employees (26%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 💰 Investors (8%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 🏛️ Home governments (9%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 🌍 Foreign governments (4%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write us!) (4%)
Your two cents:
👷
M.S:
“Nobody ever got fired for obsessing over their customers.”
🏛️ E.L:
“Deal with the noise from Washington but never lose customer focus.”
✍️
W.S:
“The big picture (the environment).”
✍️ Corrections corner
Thanks to those Intriguers who flagged Friday’s
two
brain-snaps! The Trump-Tan saga obvs relates to Intel (not IBM), and while the Turkey-F35 debate still rages, it was F-16 modernisation kits (rather than the F-35) Ankara got by delaying Sweden’s NATO bid.
🤦