URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/red-ab12
Title: 🌍 The Iran conflict widens

Today’s briefing:
— The Iran conflict widens
— This leader is buying 105,000 cars
— New Rembrandt just dropped
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. I knew that something serious had gone down when I woke up to over 100 messages on the Intrigue DiploClub group chat on Saturday morning. Either that or my mum had discovered a new conspiracy corner of the internet she’s insisted on sharing with me.
As the US-Israel operation in Iran intensifies, we’ve seen more of the region becoming embroiled, including even the Gulf states which have traditionally not been involved in any direct military operations against
Iran
. We’re also now seeing rising casualties and a direct impact on the oil markets.
Strap in, Intriguers, for as we’ll see in today’s briefing,
this is only the beginning
.
P.S.
A hearty welcome to our new subscribers who joined after my and John’s
appearance
on 2Way last night to discuss all things geopolitics. And for those who’ve not seen it, I highly recommend checking out 2Way and its innovative, real-time newsy chat show vibes.
Number of the day
~
50%
That’s how much European gas prices initially rose on Monday after QatarEnergy, the world’s top LNG producer, halted production amid Iranian attacks. That spike has since eased slightly to ~34%.
Supreme placeholder
Things are moving fast, so let’s start with a quick “
previously on The West Wing
” recap.
Since our last briefing,
the US
has achieved full air superiority over Tehran, broadened its target list (eg, a state TV broadcaster got hit), and its Israeli allies have broadcast
a Netanyahu message
in Farsi over Iran’s hacked TV networks, urging folks to rise up.
Iran has
declared the critical Hormuz Strait
closed,
h
it an oil tanker servicing the US navy, hit the world’s largest LNG export complex in Qatar (~25% of global supply), and scored other missile and drone hits across Israel, the UAE, Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar, and Saudi Arabia (including some damage to the US embassy in Riyadh).
And the broader region has
downed two Iranian Su-24 fighter jets off Qatar, suspended land passage for Iranians fleeing into Turkey, while Kuwait accidentally shot down three US fighter jets (the pilots ejected).
So you’ve got
a rapidly expanding conflict
trapping a reported 10% of the entire global container shipping fleet, and rocking energy markets, while reported casualties keep climbing: ~700 in Iran, 52 in Lebanon, 10 in Israel, six US service personnel, and one each in Oman, Kuwait, and Bahrain. And that’s before you look at the
hundreds of thousands
of foreign travellers
now stranded across Middle East hubs.
So if that’s the chessboard leaders are waking up to, how are they playing each move?
Let’s start with Paris.
President Macron just repeated a familiar point, urging his nation, “
To be free, one must be feared. To be feared, one must be powerful.
" But this time, he’s backing that rhetoric up with arguably
the most significant European security announcement
in decades:
He just offered to station nuclear-armed aircraft in the UK, Germany, Poland, Netherlands, Belgium, Greece, Sweden, and Denmark. To put it another way, he’s offering to semi-
extend France’s nuclear umbrella
to eight neighbours.
To be clear, it’s still in talks, and a French finger would still remain firmly on the trigger. But extending the offer to countries already covered by
the US
nuclear umbrella (NATO) is a reminder how much some now doubt the strength of that US commitment.
Now let’s cross the channel over to
London.
More so than any EU counterparts, it’s Prime Minister Starmer copping strays from DC.
Why?
Starmer initially distanced himself from the US/Israel attacks, then shifted to limited support: ie, allowing US use of UK bases to neutralise Iranian drones and missiles. It’s…
a
) partly because the UK (like other US allies) was sidelined pre-attack
b
) partly over concerns of legality and lessons from Iraq, but it’s also…
c
) partly his “
Love Actually
” moment to resist US bullying amid low approvals (though conservative opposition figures are also slamming him as too weak).
But nobody is copping more painful strays than the Gulf states…
Leading us to
Doha
We could’ve picked any regional hub — the Emiratis, for example, have now suffered the most Iranian attacks (~170 ballistic missiles, two cruise missiles and ~600 drones!) for their US and Israel-friendly ties plus outsized economic leverage.
But
Qatar
also stands out because…
It’s now the only Gulf state to shoot down Iranian jets, and yet…
Qatar was long Iran’s
closest Arab friend
, partly because the two share a major gas field, but also partly as a way for the Qataris to balance against the Saudis.
So this is not just a collapse in relatively functional Qatar-Iran ties, but also a collapse in Qatar’s whole strategy of
security via ambiguity
: instead of staying safe by playing the giants against each other, it’s now somehow again been hit by both Israel (2025)
and
Iran.
Intrigue’s Take
So that’s a quick wrap of Iran’s many foes, but it’s worth a broader fireside chat about its dwindling list of friends.
First
, we flagged
yesterday
the ways this war harms
Putin’s
counterweight branding and pariah strategy, but this war also brings Putin some
upsides
, at least initially:
Higher energy prices help keep his war economy afloat a little longer
Distracted and divided Western foes take their eyes off his atrocities again
His non-serious peace talks in Abu Dhabi get delayed again, and
Ukraine’s Zelensky is warning it could all drain Kyiv’s own air defence support.
Second
, it’s important to retain a bit of nuance around
China
, too. Sure, we flagged how this all highlights the regional limits of its power. Plus losing Maduro then the Ayatollah — aka ~17% of oil imports — trims Xi’s manoeuvrability ahead of his Trump summit.
But it’s worth balancing those takes against others:
i
)
Xi doesn’t care
what happens to Maduro or Khamenei. They’re not allies, he had no investment in their survival, and he’s got deep oil reserves and suppliers. But in their demise, Xi gets to contrast US aggression against Chinese restraint.
ii
) Just because hits on Maduro or Tehran might impose costs on China, that’s not to suggest these hits are
some kind of 4D chess
against China. If that were the case, DC wouldn’t have also spent a year pissing off US allies across Asia; and
iii
) The idea of this all “
distracting and diluting US power
” is already taking shape: Korean outlets are flagging the US might remove its local
THAAD air defence
(for re-use in the Middle East). China has demanded this for a decade, and now might get it, not because of any concession or contrition, but because this Iran war has forced tough US choices: defend allies in Asia, or the Middle East.
Then
third
, there’s
Cuba
, widely seen as “
next
” on Trump’s list — that’s another reason why so much now hinges on this Iran conflict, but the causation isn’t one-way:
Sure, it’s possible a regional debacle deters Trump from trying his luck in Cuba.
But it’s also possible a regional debacle spurs Trump to try his luck again, if only to generate better mid-term headlines with an easier target.
But bottom line: the longer this war lasts, the more it shifts from
who wins
to
who bleeds least
.
Today’s briefing is presented by…
Become An AI Expert In Just 5 Minutes
If you’re a decision maker at your company, you need to be on the bleeding edge of, well, everything. But before you go signing up for seminars, conferences, lunch ‘n learns, and all that jazz, just know there’s a far better (and simpler) way:
Subscribing to The Deep View.
This daily newsletter condenses everything you need to know about the
latest and greatest AI developments
into a 5-minute read. Squeeze it into your morning coffee break and before you know it, you’ll be an expert too.
Subscribe right here
. It’s totally free, wildly informative, and trusted by 600,000+ readers at Google, Meta, Microsoft, and beyond.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇰🇷
SOUTH KOREA
-
War rally?
South Korean markets reopened after a public holiday to yet another war (Iran). That means Seoul’s biggest defence contractor (Hanwha) is now up 20% alone, but the broader market has plunged ~7% amid broader jitters. (
Korea Times
)
Comment
:
It’s a similar story across other advanced economies, as investors weigh up the risks of oil spikes, inflation, and fear all trimming growth expectations.
🇷🇼
RWANDA
-
Sanctions.
The US has imposed sanctions on the Rwandan army and top generals over the country’s role in the ongoing violence in eastern DR Congo. (
Reuters
)
Comment
:
It’s getting harder — and costlier — for Rwanda to maintain the fiction that it’s not backing the M23 rebels now occupying vast swathes of neighbouring Congo.
🇨🇾
CYPRUS
-
Caught in the crossfire.
Greece has announced it’ll deploy two warships and two fighter jets to Cyprus after a series of drone attacks targeted the island’s British base. France is reportedly planning to send anti-missile and anti-drone systems too. (
Ekathimerini.com
)
Comment
:
‘The Greeks are fighting the Persians’ is quite the flashback. Anyway, Cyprus is apparently irked at the UK’s relatively broad wording for its US authorisation to use RAF bases, and was gunning for humanitarian use only. It’s a classic case study on the politics of offshore basing.
🇨🇦
CANADA
-
Friends again?
Wrapping his first prime ministerial visit to India, Mark Carney has agreed with Delhi’s Narendra Modi to fast-track trade talks, plus the two signed a pact to supply India with uranium. (
BBC
)
Comment
:
It’s a big deal given how far India-Canada ties fell
amid India’s efforts to assassinate Sikh separatist leaders in Canada and beyond. It seems less about any magical negotiation breakthrough, and more just the opportunity for a political reset that comes with a new leader (Carney replacing Trudeau).
🇸🇸
SOUTH SUDAN
-
Attack on the brink.
Authorities are blaming armed youth linked to the opposition SPLA-IO rebel group after an attack in the country’s north left at least ~170 dead. UN peacekeepers are sheltering another 1,000 civilians within their base. (
Al Jazeera
)
Comment
:
The UN has repeatedly warned the country risks more civil war amid a never-ending spat between the president (Kiir) and his former deputy (Machar).
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
You’re not on the list.
China’s ruling communist party has removed 19 names (including nine generals) from the list of lawmakers ahead of this week’s yearly Two Sessions conference. (
Independent
)
Comment
:
As usual, there’s mystery around this last-minute guestlist edit, but it fits President Xi’s recent pattern of purges, whether they’re anti-corruption, paranoia, or both.
We wrote about that
here
.
🇮🇩
INDONESIA
-
Truck that.
The Indonesian government has hit pause on an order for 105,000 vehicles from India amid parliamentary pushback urging local-built alternatives. The order, comprised of 4x4s and six-wheelers, is part of the president’s plans to establish 80,000 community cooperatives across Indonesia. (
Bloomberg
$)
Extra Intrigue
Here’s what people around the world are googling
Folks in
🇦🇷
Argentina
looked up ‘
Nahuel Gallo
’ after news broke that the Argentine soldier, arrested by Venezuelan authorities in 2024, has been
released
.
🇨🇦
Canadian
tech-heads searched for ‘
Apple
’ after the US tech giant released its newest affordable phone,
the 17e
.
And netizens in
🇬🇭
Ghana
caught up with the latest ‘
Claude
’ drama amid reports the US used Anthropic’s AI system in its Iran strikes,
hours after its US ban
.
Artwork of the day
Credits: Rijksmuseum/Kelly Schenk
The art world doesn’t often make it to the front pages (unless a critic gets pelted with
dog poo
by a disgruntled ballet director), so when it does, it’s worth a quick read.
Amsterdam’s Rijksmuseum says it’s recovered a long-lost painting by Rembrandt! Titled ‘
Vision of Zechariah in the Temple
’, it depicts the biblical scene of Archangel Gabriel announcing to high priest Zacharias that he and his wife will have a son (John the Baptist).
The painting, unseen since its 1961 private sale, goes on display from 4 March.
Today’s poll
If you were a US ally in the region, how would you respond right now?
🙅 This is Trump's war, he's on his own
🚀 The war is now hitting us, so best to help the US end it
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Where do you think this Iran conflict ends?
🔥
More chaos (65%)
🙋
A more benign Iran (23%)
😠
A more hostile Iran (11%)
✍️ Other (1%)
Your two cents:
🔥
P.J:
“The IRGC will pull a praetorian guard and install its own puppet. Perhaps give Trump oil concessions to keep from getting schwacked again. Then they skim off what they can, leaving the people with an empty bag and possibly an even more aggressive police state to keep them quiet.”
🙋
E.K.H:
“Leadership is dead, military capabilities are destroyed, and consequences for non-compliance have been established. It's not legal or moral, but it's effective.”
🔥
G: “The ‘West’ has a nasty habit of starting something without a clearly defined end.“
✍️
R.L:
“The foreign meddling, civilian loss of life, and ensuing political chaos will cause resentment to fester for generations — if it doesn't peak right after the war, it certainly will in the following decades.”