URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/the-big-beautiful-bill-aaf24a78a694e7bf
Title: 🌍 The Big, Beautiful, Bill

Today’s briefing:
— The Big, Beautiful, Bill
— Crypto transactions spike 500% in…
— World’s biggest disappointment?
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. They say never ask a man his salary, a woman her age, or a diplomat their rank (believe me — if they’re important, they’ll tell you).
We kinda stretched this rule last year with the first-ever diplomat salary report, exploring who pays their envoys the best (or perhaps more accurately, the least-worst). That first report exploded, so we’re backing up for a second edition, and we’d love your help!
If you can point us towards how much your country’s diplomats earn (it’s often in the public domain), hit reply or drop some knowledge anonymously via
this quick form
!
Now, let’s get you up to speed on
why the world is watching the US president’s
Big, Beautiful, Bill
.
PS
- We’re taking a short break this
Friday, July 4th
!
Number of the day
21
That’s how many hours the US Senate has now been debating President Trump’s big budget bill. More on that below…
Big, Beautiful, Moisturized, Focused, Flourishing
As DC slogs through the dog days of summer, we’re hearing foreign diplomats are still glued to the news on President Trump’s 940-page
Big, Beautiful Bill
now in the Senate.
But stifle that yawn, dear Intriguer. Here’s why the embassies are firing off those cables:
Defense spending
Sure, capitals are interested in the big picture (what kind of military the US wants), the medium-zoom (how DC will pay for it), but also the pixels up close (specific capabilities).
And those pixels have direct implications for
how the US engages with the world
, whether it’s the $25B for a new Golden Dome missile defence shield (inevitably prompting new thinking among rivals), or signals on
where
the US wants to focus its might (the Indo-Pacific gets all the attention in this bill, with nada new for Europe or the Middle East).
But here’s one other quick pixel:
Shipbuilding
alone gets four whole pages on (say) how much rolled steel to buy for subs. And while that’s principally about the US lifting its own naval game (a leaked memo once flagged China’s shipbuilding capacity as
232 times
America’s), allies are counting on it too:
The
AUKUS
(
🇦🇺
🇬🇧
🇺🇸
) defence tech pact, for example, hinges Australia’s future nuclear-powered subs on the US meeting its own sub needs, hence the Aussies investing in US shipyards, even as the White House reviews the underlying pact.
AI rules
Remember waaaaay back at February’s AI summit in Paris, when the US and the UK declined to sign the joint text out of concern it’d
“kill a transformative industry just as it's taking off"
? Well that same debate is now playing out back at the US state-federal level, with this bill aiming to stop
states
from passing their own AI rules for the next few years.
That’s one reason why several members of the president’s own party have been holding out — in addition to
AI’s big questions
around how to balance safety with progress, this part of the bill also touches on deep-seated US debates around
state rights
. And sure enough, just moments ago, that part of the
bill just got voted down
, 99-1.
The energy race
US lawmakers are also trying to find savings, including among the renewable energy
incentives
passed under President Biden, which critics argue saw DC fire-hosing too much cash at an elitist agenda.
But supporters say this help was key to wrestling back the solar supply chain dominated by
China
, which built more solar last year than the US did over
the past quarter of a century
. And yet the draft bill now phases out support for solar (though not fossil fuels), while leaving or worsening its hurdles (US solar prices are already 5x the rest of the world).
The revenge tax
And while there’s always debate around what ends up in a bill, many gave a big sigh of relief that something got left on the cutting room floor: Treasury Secretary Bessent ditched
Section 899
(the ‘revenge tax’), noting it was no longer necessary because he’d negotiated with the G7 to just exempt US firms from the
OECD
’s 15% global minimum tax.
That OECD measure is meant to stop multinationals playing capitals off against each other in a
tax-race to the bottom
, though some of the biggest tax hits would’ve been to US firms. The proposed US revenge tax had spooked markets and investors given the uncertainty around the details and impacts, but it’s now gone — hence the sigh of relief.
Intrigue’s Take
You might’ve noticed some congressional urgency to meet President Trump’s July 4th deadline, and for a legislative body not exactly known for its agility, it’s worth a quick look at why: POTUS wants
a
) an early win,
b
) party unity,
c
) pre-midterm momentum, and
d
) tactical leverage to get moderates in line towards aims
a
through
c
above.
And sure, the
tight margins
in each chamber mean the White House doesn’t have a lot of wriggle room to play with here. But that pressure works both ways: asking too many questions on a razor-thin vote might just get you primaried.
But zooming out, what does all this reveal about
the US and its place in the world?
Of course, those foreign embassies will be looking for signals on the above
substance
, whether around America’s trajectory on defence, AI, energy, tax, or beyond.
But they’ll also be looking for signals in amongst the
process
: a degree of chaos, inefficiency, and even dysfunction is baked into what’s long made America’s democracy relatively resilient and adaptive over the years.
But there’s a shifting equilibrium among it all, and foreign capitals will be watching to understand where it lands this time around on the chaos vs progress spectrum.
Sound smarter:
Tesla shares are down over 5% in pre-market trading after President Trump hinted the US would save a "
fortune
" by cutting government subsidies that benefit the companies of his erstwhile ally, Elon Musk.
Intrigue presents:
“By 2042, 95% of humanity's energy usage will be downstream of solar"
That’s a big claim, and it comes from physicist, engineer, fellow Intriguer, and the founder of Terraform Industries, now making fuel out of thin air,
Dr Casey Handmer
.
Don’t miss our chat with Casey! It’s online, Thursday July 10th.
Join here
!
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇹🇭
THAILAND
-
Embattled PM suspended.
Thailand’s Constitutional Court has suspended Prime Minister Paetongtarn Shinawatra from office after agreeing to consider ethics allegations over her criticism of the Thai military’s handling of a border skirmish during a (leaked) call with a Cambodian leader. (
AP
)
Comment:
Whether it’s this week, this month, or this year, it’s hard to see how she survives after committing the unforgivable sin of Thai politics: dunking on the all-powerful royal-military establishment.
🇮🇱
ISRAEL
-
Another Bibi visit to the White House?
Israel’s Benjamin Netanyahu will apparently make his third 2025 visit to the White House for talks with President Trump next week. It comes after the US president hinted at a possible Gaza ceasefire, pressing Israel to “
get the hostages back!!!”
(
France 24
)
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
Ain’t no party like a Communist Party.
Official stats suggest China’s ruling party membership has crawled past the 100 million mark, though the pace of growth has continued to slow, and the reported acceptance rate now hovers near Ivy League levels at 10%. (
Bloomberg
$)
Comment
: That all reflects the ‘quality over quantity’ mantra President Xi implemented after taking the reins in 2012. But some of China’s more consequential stats might be the ones we’ll never know — eg, there’ve long been suggestions the number of China’s underground church members might rival party cadres.
🇪🇸
SPAIN
-
It's getting hot in here…
Temperatures in Spain just hit a record 46°C (115°F) as an intense heatwave grips the south of Europe. (
Guardian
)
Comment
: The UN secretary-general happens to be in Spain right now, and he flagged these kinds of record-breaking heatwaves as now “the new normal”.
🇲🇬
MADAGASCAR
-
That’s my island.
President Rajoelina has just swung through Paris for talks with President Macron on the future of five empty French islets that Madagascar claims. (
AfricaNews
)
Comment
: The islands are uninhabited and tiny (43sq km), but international sea law means these lil’ guys give France jurisdiction over resource-rich waters bigger than mainland France itself.
🇵🇭
PHILIPPINES
-
Long-distance relationship.
Lithuania and the Philippines have signed a security deal focused on cybersecurity, munitions production, and maritime security. (
Independent
)
Comment
: Ring a bell? You might recall tiny NATO and EU member Lithuania made global headlines a few years ago when it stuck up for distant Taiwan at real cost. Lithuania’s then-FM later
told us
it was a reflection of Lithuania’s values, having survived decades of Soviet occupation. There might be something similar driving this new bromance with Manila, located ~10,000km / ~6,000 mi away but (like Lithuania) now facing pressure from an authoritarian neighbour.
🇧🇴
BOLIVIA
-
Crypto’s king.
The Andean nation’s crypto transactions have spiked 530% in the first half of 2025, as Bolivians seek to hedge against the depreciation of their local currency. The
Boliviano
has lost half its value on the black market this year, despite the official rate remaining pegged. (
Central Banking
)
Extra Intrigue
Our commodities corner is back
Oil
:
Prices fell on Monday as traders anticipated another
round of OPEC output increases
.
Steel
: Brasilia is investigating
whether steel from China, India, and Indonesia
is getting dumped onto Brazil’s market, harming local producers.
Agriculture
: Farmers in India are trying to get ahead of
above-average rains
by sowing their summer crops early (think rice, corn, cotton, soya, sugar).
Snafu of the day
Is there a bigger disappointment than the ending of the TV drama
Lost
?
Perhaps this: Norway’s state-owned gambling operator apparently told
several thousand
folks they’d won huge windfalls in the EU-wide Eurojackpot last week. But it turns out they’d multiplied (instead of divided) the jackpot by 100 when converting from euros to Norwegian Kroners. Point in favour of the euro currency union, we guess?
Today’s poll
What's a sci-fi you think Intriguers would dig?
👽 Arrival
🪱 Dune
🛸 The Three-Body Problem
👾 District 9
🌆 Elysium
🚀 Embassytown
✍️ Other (Write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Which country do you think has the most cultural power, and why?
🇨🇳
China (29%)
🇮🇳
India (15%)
🇧🇷
Brazil (4%)
🇫🇷
France (35%)
🇲🇽
Mexico (5%)
🇿🇦
South Africa (1%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (11%)
Your two cents:
🇫🇷
C.D.K:
“Whether it's cuisine, art, architecture, or fashion, the very thought of France simply reeks of culture (Parisian snobbery aside).”
🇨🇳
J:
“Large population at home, and a concerted effort to build infrastructure abroad. Perhaps quieter culturally, but amassing a wide base.”
🇮🇳
T:
“ India is the cultural juggernaut of the 21st century.”
✍️
S.Z.K.B:
“Austria deserves recognition for making half the world think that Beethoven was Austrian and Hitler German.”
Honourable mentions:
USA, UK, South Korea, Italy and Japan.