URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/turkish-economy-turning-point
Title: 🌍 The Turkish economy is at a turning point

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Whoever said life ends at 60 had clearly never heard of Paul Biya, the oldest serving head of state in the world. At the ripe ol’ age of 90, he’s serving as Cameroon’s president, a post he’s held since 1982.
Today’s briefing is a 3.9 min read:
🇹🇷
Turkey
’s economy is in for a shock.
🇪🇭
Israel may recognise Moroccan claims in
Western Sahara
.
➕
Plus:
The first ever trans-Pacific flight, how the papers are covering the BRICS ministerial meeting, and a space-based Friday quiz.
🎧
Today’s Intrigue Outloud:
How Venezuela’s president is dividing South America.
Listen here!
🗺️ AROUND THE WORLD
🇰🇷
South Korea
: President Yoon Suk Yeol has pledged to
protect his country’s semiconductor sector
amid an “
all-out [tech] war
” between China and the US. Global chip revenues are projected to drop 11% this year.
🇺🇦
Ukraine
: At least
nine people are dead
and thousands have been evacuated following Tuesday’s breach of the Kakhovka dam, according to local officials.
🇲🇾
Malaysia
: Indonesia and Malaysia agreed to
end an 18 year maritime border dispute
and pledged to unite in promoting palm oil worldwide during Indonesian President Joko Widodo’s visit to Malaysia.
🇧🇷
Brazil
: The Lula administration has unveiled plans to
stop deforestation in the Amazon by 2030
. But the proposal faces an uphill battle after Congress voted to scale down the relevant ministries.
🇨🇩
Democratic Republic of the Congo
(DRC)
: A top UN official has said UN peacekeepers should
withdraw from the DRC “as quickly as possible”
(without creating a power vacuum). The UN mission to the DRC costs about $1B per year and has been running since 1999.
🇹🇷
TURKEY | GEO-ECONOMICS
Erdoğan has passed his re-election test. But will he give up control of the economy?
Turkish lira plunges as new minister vows more “rational” direction
Briefly:
The Turkish lira slipped by more than 7% against the US dollar on Wednesday,
hitting a record new low
.
The slide comes as Turkey’s newly appointed finance minister, Mehmet Simsek, pledged to return the country’s economy to more “rational ground”.
And you don’t need to read between the lines here.
You can just read the lines. Simsek was criticising Erdoğan’s economic management as being irrational:
Erdoğan frequently intervened to try and prop up the lira, and
He said lower interest rates reduce inflation (the opposite is true)
The result?
☝️
Sky high inflation
,
peaking at 86% last year
👇
A weak currency
,
losing 60% of its value since 2021, and
😨
Spooked investors
, who now
hold <1% of Turkey’s bonds (they held 19% in 2017)
So… if we’re returning to rationality, why has the lira now plunged even faster?
Before his re-election, Erdoğan was burning through reserves to prop up the lira (to avoid voters seeing this exact collapse). But the central bank’s coffers are now basically empty. So the currency’s prop is now gone. And the market is speaking.
Intrigue’s take:
Rebuilding the Turkish economy is a daunting task, but this isn’t Simsek’s first rodeo. He’s a highly regarded ex-banker who was instrumental (as finance minister) in helping Turkey rebound from the 2008 financial crisis.
But to do that again, he’ll need Erdoğan to hand over the reins. And that’s not really Erdoğan’s style.
Also worth noting:
During his re-election campaign, Erdoğan promised he would
keep cutting interest rates
if reconfirmed as president.
Erdoğan has
overhauled
several other key cabinet roles in an apparent effort to help normalise Turkey’s economic and foreign policies.
📰
GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES
How different newspapers covered
: The BRICS ministerial summit held in Cape Town.
Links
:
BBC
,
Global Times
,
Japan Times
.
📢
Advertise with International Intrigue!
Want to reach 55,000+ globally-engaged decision makers?
Let us help you get in front of some of the most influential decision makers around the world. We’ve driven great results for professional services firms, luxury goods, and tech platforms, at great prices.
All our advertising slots are sold through Q2, but there are a few spots still remaining in Q3.
Get in touch to lock in a great rate
,
or to find out more about how we can help you achieve your goals!
Email Intrigue Sales
🇪🇭
WESTERN SAHARA | GEOPOLITICS
Credits: GeoCurrents.
Israel might back Morocco in Western Sahara
Briefly:
Israel is
reportedly
considering recognising Morocco’s sovereignty over Western Sahara in exchange for full diplomatic ties and a free trade agreement.
Since the 70s
, Western Sahara has been split between Moroccan control along the coast, and the local Sahrawi people’s control in the interior (under the flag of the Polisario Front). Though each side claims full sovereignty, the UN has designated it all as a ‘non-self-governing territory’, leaving its status ambiguous.
But in 2020
, in exchange for Morocco’s partial upgrade of relations with Israel, the US became the first country to recognise Morocco’s full sovereignty over Western Sahara. And now Israel may do likewise.
Intrigue’s take:
Quick quiz: which country was the first to recognise US independence? Yep, it was Morocco. So there was something neatly symmetrical about the US becoming the first country to recognise Morocco’s claims here.
But the US move did attract
some criticism
that Washington was sacrificing American principles (and Sahrawi rights) for the sake of political expediency.
And if Israel follows suit, it can expect similar criticism (plus a bit more scrutiny of its own territorial disputes back home).
Also worth noting:
The speaker of Israel’s Knesset visited Morocco this week, making him the
highest-ranking Israeli official to visit
since 2020.
For four decades, Morocco has been building a
2,700km wall
along the Sahrawi areas (longer than the distance between London and Kyiv).
👀
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Here’s what Team Intrigue recommends for the weekend. If you have:
10 mins
: read why the US should reveal
evidence of alien life
, if it has any.
50 mins:
watch the first episode of ‘
The Bureau
’, a hit series based on an elite team within the French Secret Service.*
4 hours
: read ‘
Walking in Mud
: A Navy SEAL's 10 Rules for Surviving the New Normal’, on how to navigate our increasingly muddy world.
* This was one of several brilliant suggestions shared with Team Intrigue through our exclusive WhatsApp community. Just recommend Intrigue to five people using the unique link at the bottom of this email to join the conversation!
📜
THIS DAY IN HISTORY
On this day 95 years ago
,
Australian aviator Charles Kingsford Smith landed in Brisbane after piloting the first ever trans-Pacific flight. The four-man crew had taken off from Oakland, California nine days prior and clocked an average speed of 138 km/hour (85mph) during the journey.
🗳️ QUIZ TIME!
1) How many satellites are currently orbiting Earth?
a) ~ 10,500
b) ~ 7,900
c) ~ 2,600
d) ~ 8,200
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) When did the Soviet Union launch the first-ever satellite into space?
a) 1961
b) 1957
c) 1969
d) 1955
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) How many people have ever walked on the moon? (excludes aliens)
a) 7
b) 12
c) 11
d)  8
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Answers: 1:
b
, 2:
b
, 3:
b