URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/the-russo-ukraine-peace-talks-84fc8dd53aa79344
Title: 🌍 The Russo-Ukraine peace talks

Today’s briefing:
— Why did Putin skip his own talks?
— Will the US get its own Iron Dome?
— The international day of what now?
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. On this day in 1929 the very first Oscars were presented at the Hollywood Roosevelt Hotel. Emil Jennings and Janet Gaynor won best actor and actress respectively in a ceremony lasting just fifteen minutes. Things really were better in the old days.
In the spirit of that refreshing brevity, let’s dive right into our main story today in which we answer your questions on the
latest developments in the Russia-Ukraine conflict
.
Why did Putin bail?
Russia and Ukraine were scheduled to have their first direct talks since 2022 yesterday (Thursday), but they never actually happened, with Moscow blaming “
logistical issues
”.
That raises a few intriguing questions:
Who was supposed to show?
After Putin’s weeks of deflecting the US-proposed (and Ukraine-backed) 30-day ceasefire, the leaders of Germany, France, Poland, and the UK visited Ukraine’s Zelensky in Kyiv last weekend and gave Putin
an ultimatum
: accept the ceasefire or face massive new sanctions.
But Putin deflected again, instead proposing direct talks in Turkey for Thursday “
without pre-conditions
”. He was vague on who might attend, but Ukraine’s Zelensky himself vowed to meet him in Istanbul, and President Trump offered to join also.
Then, just hours before kick-off, the Kremlin revealed Putin was sending a more junior delegation (dubbed “
stand-in props
” by Zelensky), led by a former culture minister who also headed up the 2022 peace talks. Which leads us to…
Haven’t we been here before?
Yep. Russia and Ukraine first held talks in Belarus four days after Putin’s tanks rolled across the border, and then again in Istanbul another 29 days later.
That second round in March 2022 produced a draft agreement that would’ve included:
A
ban
on Ukraine’s NATO membership
A tacit
acceptance
of Russia’s seizure of Ukraine’s Crimea, and
A
cap
on Ukraine’s military.
But with Russia’s 64th motor rifle brigade already committing war-crimes outside Kyiv, the
Istanbul talks collapsed
— Ukraine wanted Western security guarantees to prevent Russia from simply invading again, but Moscow insisted Russia itself should be the guarantor to protect Ukraine (… from Russia).
And those talks have been the subject of Russian propaganda ever since, attempting to frame Moscow as offering peace while the West supposedly forced Ukraine to block it.
So why did Putin propose then skip yesterday’s talks?
Faced with Europe’s ceasefire-or-sanctions ultimatum, Putin’s proposal was probably a bluff, assuming Zelensky would refuse without a ceasefire in place first. That would’ve enabled Putin to:
Keep
projecting
himself as a peacemaker and wartime statesman
Keep
hoping
for any decisive battlefield breakthrough after 1,177 days of trying
Keep
stringing
the West along until it loses interest and/or drops support, and
Keep
delaying
Putin’s own reckoning back home, where any truce would read like a betrayal given his massive economic, military, and demographic sunk costs, all justified by years of loyal state-media framing.
But while Zelensky initially played into Putin’s hands by insisting on a ceasefire
before
the talks, the Ukrainian leader then quickly agreed — that reverse-Uno’d Putin, who baulked.
So, what’s next?
The talks have been rescheduled for today (Friday), though we’re not holding our breath. And neither is President Trump, arguing “
nothing's going to happen until Putin and I get together.
”
Intrigue’s Take
This week’s twists and turns have produced a few intriguing results:
First
, Putin’s attempt to blame Ukrainian obstinance has backfired into a vivid illustration of his own predicament
Second
, that’s nudged media narratives away from Putin being some masterful strategist, with several headlines now openly calling him something else, and yet
Third
, that brings us back to Europe’s original ultimatum: ceasefire or sanctions.
But haven’t we been here before? Yes. 16 times, to be precise. And sure, the EU is now duly working on its
17th
sanctions package.
Yet each new round just begs the question: why drop this latest hammer now rather than (say) when Putin first invaded, or when he seized Ukrainian children, or when he attempted to blow a US-bound jet out of the sky, or any number of other escalations.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
The Dispatch
For The Silent Majority of Self-Directed Thinkers
Tired of partisan media cheerleading for one team? Start a better news habit and join The Dispatch.
Jonah Goldberg and Steve Hayes launched The Dispatch in 2019 to build an enduring presence for original reporting and thoughtful analysis that cuts through the partisan spin to deliver the facts. No insulting clickbait, no false outrage, no annoying auto-play videos—just reliable journalism that prioritizes context, depth, and understanding.
Join half a million loyal readers and start reading The Dispatch today.
International Intrigue readers: Claim your exclusive 30-day, all-access FREE trial today.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇸🇾
SYRIA
-
UAE’s state-owned ports giant invests in Tartous.
As President Trump wraps his regional tour in the UAE today, the Gulf monarchy’s
DP World
has announced $800M to develop and run a multi-purpose terminal at Syria’s Tartous port, just after Trump announced he’d lift US sanctions. (
Zawya
)
Comment:
Russia claims to still have a naval base at Tartous, but satellite imagery suggests Moscow has been withdrawing assets since at least January. Against that backdrop, this UAE-Syria deal looks a lot to us like Damascus reasserting control.
🇧🇪
BELGIUM
-
Parliament votes to ditch nuclear phase-out.
Reversing two decades of nuclear-wary policy, Belgium’s lower house just voted to abandon its 2025 nuclear phase-out. Backed by a new conservative government, the 102-8 vote still has more hurdles to clear, but seems set to maintain if not expand nuclear’s 40% share of Belgium’s energy mix. (
DW
)
Comment:
Why? Public sentiment has eased even since Belgium’s own 2022 decision to delay its phase-out by a decade — that not only reflects broader energy insecurity fears, but also the cautionary tale of Germany’s own nuclear phase-out in 2023.
🇷🇺
RUSSIA
-
Abkhazia resumes direct flights with Moscow.
Georgia’s Russian-held territory of Abkhazia has now resumed direct flights to Moscow, prompting more condemnation out of Georgia (despite its increasingly Russia-friendly government). (
Eurasianet
)
🇬🇧
UNITED KINGDOM
-
Former special forces general named UK naval chief.
The appointment of Gwyn Jenkins has turned a few heads, because he’s previously faced criticism for his handling of alleged UK war crimes in Afghanistan and resettlement efforts for allied Afghan forces. (
Politico EU
)
🇵🇭
PHILIPPINES
-
Manila wants to export renewables.
Manila’s energy secretary has announced a plan to export surplus renewable energy across Southeast Asia and up to Taiwan. (
Bloomberg
$)
Comment:
These ideas pop up periodically, but they keep hitting the same political, regulatory, and technical walls.
🇧🇷
BRAZIL
-
China opens visa-free travel to select LatAm countries.
China has used a Latin American and Caribbean forum to announce visa-free travel for folks from Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Peru, and Uruguay. (
AP
)
Comment:
This deal is already open to most advanced economies, in hopes tourism might help revive China’s economy. And there’s been a solid uptick, but arrivals are still lagging below pre-Covid levels, so China keeps expanding its list of eligible countries.
🇸🇩
SUDAN
-
Drone attacks cut power across Khartoum.
Two years into Sudan’s civil war and two months after the military finally retook Khartoum from the infamous RSF paramilitary, the group is now responding with drone attacks on the capital, causing widespread power outages. (
Reuters
)
From our sponsors
Former Zillow Execs Target $1.3T Market
Spencer Rascoff co-founded Zillow. Austin Allison sold his company to Zillow for $125M. Now they’re transforming the $1.3T vacation home market via co-ownership. By selling shares of luxury properties, Pacaso’s already earned $100M+ in gross profit.
Invest today for just $2.80/share.
Map of the day
Credits: Defense Intelligence Agency
The idea of a big protective missile-defence shield over the US mainland has been around since at least the 1950s. But the US Defense Intelligence Agency has now
released a visual report
arguing why the US needs one now, citing the emerging capabilities of China, Russia, North Korea, and Iran.
Friday quiz
Today is International Day of Light!
1) The date falls on the anniversary of which event?
First succesful laser surgery
Invention of the light bulb
Discovery of light waves
Invention of the LED light
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) How fast does light travel?
200,000 km/s - 124,000 mi/s
250,000 km/s - 155,000 mi/s
300,000 km/s - 186,000 mi/s
350,000 km/s - 217,000 mi/s
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) We measured the strength of early lasers by their ability to cut through what?
Car doors
Sheets of paper
Pint glasses
Razor blades
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate