URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/imf-isnt-cheerful
Title: 🌍 The IMF isn't too cheerful

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Looking for a gift idea? France once got Queen Elizabeth a
grasshopper-shaped wine cooler
that doubles as a drinks table. On a budget? Well the US once gave the Russian foreign minister
two potatoes
. Ah, you’re looking to send a
message
? Well sassy Singapore once got President Bush an
abs exerciser
. Those abs won’t chisel themselves, George.
Today’s briefing is a 4.3 min read:
🏦
The
IMF
sees economic turbulence ahead.
🇲🇲
Myanmar
’s military junta reveals weakness.
➕
Plus:
The world’s shortest coup, how the papers are covering Biden’s Northern Ireland visit, and some light reading on start-ups.
☕️
International Intrigue x Morning Brew
One week left until Intrigue co-founders John Fowler and Helen Zhang take you behind the headlines from Morning Brew HQ.
Sign up here!
🗺️ AROUND THE WORLD
🇨🇳
China
: Australia’s foreign minister Penny Wong encouraged Australian exporters to
diversify away from China
yesterday (Wednesday), citing the difficulty in separating the countries’ economic and strategic issues.
🇩🇪
Germany
: Berlin will
fail to fulfil its NATO pledges
despite an increase in defence spending, according to a leaked memo. Germany had promised to deliver a fully-equipped army division to NATO by 2025.
🇮🇳
India
: At least four people have died after
gunmen opened fire inside an Indian army base
close to the Pakistani border. Indian authorities believe the shooting was not terror-related, but have declined to share additional information at this stage.
🇧🇷
Brazil
: President Lula da Silva has
landed in China
after his previous trip was delayed due to illness. Lula is looking to deepen Brazil’s ties with China, its largest trading partner since 2009.
🇹🇩
Chad
: Germany has
expelled Chad’s ambassador
in retaliation for the expulsion of its own top diplomat to Chad. Germany’s ambassador had recently criticised the country’s military junta.
🏦
IMF | GLOBAL ECONOMY
Data: IMF.
The IMF warns of lower growth ahead
Briefly:
Optimism doesn’t come naturally to global bodies like the IMF, but Tuesday’s
World Economic Outlook
was particularly bleak. The IMF’s medium-term outlook is now the weakest in over 30 years.
Of particular concern
is the IMF’s belief that inflation won’t return within target ranges before 2025. Despite falling food and energy prices, core inflation remains sticker than a popsicle on a hot summer’s day. So central bankers feel the need to jack up interest rates to cool down their over-heating economies.
But IMF economists also highlighted a new threat to global growth
: “geoeconomic fragmentation”. In short, this means that as tensions between global powers increase, cross-border trade and international investment will suffer, to the detriment of outward-looking regions such as Asia.
Intrigue’s take:
After a period of encouraging economic news, the IMF’s report is a bit of a bummer. And these forecasts matter. Boardrooms and cabinets often watch them closely, tightening their belts in anticipation of tougher times. But this, in turn, can bring on the very slowdown being warned of.
Still, the IMF isn’t the only one shaping expectations like this. On Tuesday, US
Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen
effectively told everyone to take a chill pill, saying
“the outlook is reasonably bright.”
Ultimately, time will tell which of the two assessments the world believes most, because that’ll shape which of the two futures we get.
Also worth noting:
Annual US inflation for March
eased to 5%
, the lowest figure in nearly two years.
Famous investor
Warren Buffett recently sold
most of his shares in Taiwanese semiconductor giant TSMC, noting that geopolitical tensions were
“certainly a consideration”
.
📰
GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES
How different newspapers covered
: US President Joe Biden’s visit to Northern Ireland.
Links
:
Sky News
,
Irish Post
,
Straits Times
.
Today’s briefing is sponsored by
Hubspot
You can mull, moan, mourn… but there’s 24 hours in a day.
If you find yourself wishing for more, consider us facilitators — this free HubSpot ebook will help you master time management and punch the metaphorical workplace clock with pride.
Also included are four productivity templates that will help you spruce up your process.
So stop slackin’ and get crackin’…
Download here!
🇲🇲
MYANMAR | MILITARY JUNTA
Myanmar’s ruling junta confirms deadly airstrike on village
Briefly:
Myanmar's ruling military junta has
sought to justify
Tuesday’s deadly attack on a village in the opposition stronghold of Sagaing, claiming anti-regime fighters were present. The attack left more than 100 people dead.
Villagers had gathered to open a new office of the National Unity Government (NUG), the coalition seeking a return to civilian rule. Children were reportedly dancing when a fighter jet and helicopter gunship attacked.
The junta has ruled Myanmar
for most of the past 60 years, claiming it’s the only institution capable of holding the diverse country together. But the NUG called for a national uprising in September 2021, after the junta ousted the country’s democratically-elected government earlier that year.
Analysts say the junta’s airstrikes are a show of weakness rather than strength: as the military loses ground across the country, it’s having to resort to air power.
Intrigue’s take:
The world will be watching how key regional body ASEAN (the Association of Southeast Asian Nations) responds to all this. Beyond banning the junta from its summits and issuing a 5-point plan (which Myanmar has ignored), it’s been pretty muted to date.
Many hope
this will change at next month’s
ASEAN
summit
in Indonesia. It’s an opportunity to put some substance behind the cherished principle of
ASEAN centrality
, which emphasises ASEAN’s role in the region’s global engagement. If not,
ASEAN centrality
risks becoming little more than a slogan.
Also worth noting:
Hours after the attack, ASEAN
tweeted
Thingyan
new year’s greetings to the people of Myanmar. The ASEAN chair
condemned
the attack two days later.
Russia and China
blocked
the UN Security Council from condemning the attack. A
UN report
accuses Russia and China of supplying Myanmar’s junta with weapons.
👀
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Here’s what we’re reading on
venture capital and start-ups
:
Silicon Valley investors are
looking at opportunities in the Middle East
.
Funding for Brazilian start-ups
fell by more than 80%
last quarter.
Why
data analytics is failing decision makers
, from our friends over at
bulletpitch
-
subscribe here
for a deep dive on a new start-up delivered to your inbox every week.
Unicorn companies have
returned to being a rarity
.
📜
ON THIS DAY IN HISTORY
Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez celebrating shortly after the failed 2002 coup. Credits: Telesur
On this day in 2002…
… a Venezuelan military coup was thwarted after only one day. A separate military intervention then restored President Hugo Chavez to power the following morning.
🗳️ POLL TIME!
Do you think the economic costs of geopolitical fragmentation are worth the gains?
⛓️ Yes, decoupling from unfriendly countries must be a priority
🔫 No, it's like shooting yourself in the foot
🖋️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
What lesson do you think we should draw from the role of Russian intel in Ukraine?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
✋
Don't let foreign intel agencies get a foothold  (49%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️ 🌤️ Democracies have a long-run advantage over autocracies (33%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
💪
Don't mess with Ukraine (14%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!) (5%)
Your two cents:
✋
B.B.
“Of course nobody should allow foreign intel to shape public opinion or even policy. The trick is identifying them early enough to prevent them from doing just that.”
✍️
T.B:
“Democracies are just as fallible as autocracies when it comes to misinterpreting information. The lesson is to have proper institutions in place to capitalise on the information at hand”