URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/eu-drug-shipping-problem
Title: 🌍 The EU has a drug shipping problem

Today’s newsletter supported by:
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
If you’ve found us to be a helpful way to stay on top of the world, please consider sharing Intrigue with a friend or family member. By using your unique referral code down below, you can also earn some pretty intriguing perks.
Today’s briefing is a 5 min read:
🇪🇺
The
EU
’s drug problem.
🇮🇱
POTUS in
Israel
.
➕
Plus:
An outage in Guinea-Bissau,
an intriguing vulnerability, how the papers are covering China’s latest economic data, and why folks in Hong Kong are googling discounted apartments.
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇰🇵
North Korea
: Russia’s foreign minister
arrived in North Korea
yesterday (Wednesday) for a two-day visit. US intel officials
say
North Korea has supplied Russia with thousands of crates of weapons in recent weeks.
🇫🇷
France
: Seven airports
evacuated their terminals
and rerouted flights yesterday after receiving a series of phoney bomb threats. France has now raised its threat alert to the highest level.
🇰🇭
Cambodia
: A court sentenced an opposition figure to an
extra three years
in prison on incitement charges yesterday. He had posted a video to Facebook in January discussing the politically sensitive history of the Khmer Rouge regime’s ousting in 1979.
🇲🇽
Mexico
: The president (‘AMLO’) says he’ll host his Cuban, Venezuelan, Haitian and Honduran counterparts for a
summit on migration this weekend
. He recently said up to 10,000 migrants are passing through Mexico on their way to the US each day.
🇿🇦
South Africa
: A court is currently
determining South Africa’s real Zulu king
. The dispute began in 2021 following the death of King Goodwill Zwelithini, whose 50-year reign was the longest in Zulu history.
🇪🇺
EU | Trade
The EU has a new anti-drug plan
A senior shipping industry executive is
warning
that drug trafficking gangs have infiltrated shipping supply chains to an “
extreme
” extent.
European authorities have had a busy few years
, with annual drug seizures consistently breaking new records. But criminal organisations often stay a step ahead:
They’ve expanded to
smaller ports
to avoid detection
They’ve
streamlined their operations
, and
They’ve boosted
drug production
locally.
So what’s Europe doing?
In its latest ‘
roadmap
’, Brussels introduces the European Ports Alliance, an EU-wide scheme focussed on:
Customs
- authorities now inspect less than 10% of all cargo
Policing
- there’s not enough police-customs coordination, and
Companies
- there’s not enough coordination between shipping firms and law enforcement, either.
Intrigue's take:
Most drugs entering Europe essentially hitch a ride on commercial cargo ships, which means any policy aimed at illicit trade will end up impacting lawful trade too.
So that’s really what this latest plan is about: it’s not realistic to inspect every container; better targeting is key, and that means better coordination.
Also worth noting:
The port of Antwerp, Europe’s key cocaine trafficking hub, is aiming to
inspect all “high-risk” cargo
by 2028.
📰
How newspapers covered…
China’s latest economic data
Tokyo, Japan
“China GDP beats forecast as stimulus measures kick in”
London, UK
“China’s Surprise on GDP Partly Due to Revisions, Economists Say”
Mumbai, India
“Nomura* upgrades China's YoY GDP growth forecast to 5.1% in 2023 vs 4.8% prior”
*Nomura is a Japanese investment bank.
Today’s newsletter is supported by: The Motley Fool
Making the world smarter, happier, and richer
The Motley Fool helps millions of people attain financial freedom through our website, podcasts, books, and premium investing services.
Sign up today.
Israel-Hamas War
Biden’s trip to Israel was low-key successful
He spent a little less than eight hours in Israel
but got a fair bit done
, including a Gaza humanitarian aid deal via Egypt’s
Rafah border crossing
.
Biden added that if the aid isn’t intercepted by Hamas - a key Israeli fear - Egypt has agreed it’ll let more in.
In parallel, Israeli officials are
saying
they won’t
allow aid in
from Israel’s side of the border until Hamas releases all hostages.
Biden also reiterated that the US backed Israel’s war against Hamas:
And he
said
US assessments were
concurring
with Israel that a stray rocket from “
the other team
” (not Israel) hit the Al Ahli Hospital in Gaza yesterday.
We’re expecting to see declassified US intel soon, adding to the emerging physical evidence at the site.
Some outlets have walked back their initial reporting on Israeli culpability, but don’t hold your breath for regional governments to follow suit.
As we foreshadowed, Biden sought to
walk a fine line
between showing support for Israel without further angering its Arab neighbours, telling Israelis:
“
You can’t look at what has happened here ... and not scream out for justice. But I caution this: while you feel that rage, don’t be consumed by it. After 9/11, we were enraged in the United States. When we sought justice and got justice, we also made mistakes.
”
UNSC inaction
The US vetoed a UN Security Council (UNSC) resolution
yesterday that would’ve condemned the Hamas attacks while calling for a ‘
humanitarian pause
’ to allow aid into Gaza. 12 members voted in favour; the UK and Russia abstained.
Explaining the US veto, Ambassador Linda Thomas-Greenfield
said
the resolution made no mention of Israel’s right to defend itself.
France’s ambassador lamented the US decision,
saying
there’s no contradiction
between Israel’s right to defend itself and the need to protect civilians and respect international law.
Either way, this will fuel scepticism that the UNSC is no longer fit for purpose.
What about Ukraine?
According to
the Financial Times
, the ‘Global South’ is finding contradictions in the West’s approach to Israel
vis a vis
Ukraine. An Arab official told the FT:
“
If you describe cutting off water, food and electricity in Ukraine as a war crime, then you should say the same thing about Gaza.
”
Otherwise, the argument goes, you risk undoing 18 months of work to nudge (for the sake of the international order) countries like Brazil, India, Indonesia, and South Africa to take a stand against Russia’s invasion.
Russia clearly has an interest in stoking tensions here
:
A diminished Russia wields less influence in the region but will (along with China) be happy to see US power consumed there.
Plus, Russia now relies on Iran for some military kit, a fact Iran will highlight to Moscow when seeking support for its approach to Israel.
Final thought:
After 18 months on the front pages, Ukraine now risks losing the world’s attention. And that’s partly what a fraying world order looks like: more conflicts, diluting more of the world’s bandwidth, in turn making each conflict tougher to solve, while allowing additional conflicts to flare up.
🇬🇼
Guinea-Bissau | Energy
Guinea-Bissau’s capital goes dark
Folks in Guinea-Bissau’s capital (Bissau) have gone without power since early Tuesday after the government missed payments to its energy supplier.
The Turkey-based power company
,
Karpowership
, has supplied the country with electricity since 2019. But with $17M in unpaid payments piling up, it says it can no longer operate its local power station.
Intrigue’s take:
We write often about US-China competition and the way it plays out through infrastructure and debt around the world. But this story is a reminder of how things can look from Bissau and beyond, where options are limited.
Also worth noting:
Karpowership shut off electricity in
Sierra Leone’s capital
last month due to $40M in missed payments.
➕
Extra Intrigue
Here’s what people around the world were googling yesterday, 18 October:
🇨🇦
​Canadians
looked up a senate
proposal
to establish a ‘
Canada universal basic income
’.
🇭🇰
Folks in
Hong Kong
checked out the ‘
煥然壹居
’ (
Huanran Yiju
)
housing project
(
🇭🇰
), which will offer its remaining 28 units at a discount from next Thursday.
🇧🇷
Brazilian
football fans googled ‘
Libertadores Feminina 2023
’ for updates on the women’s football league
semi-finals
.
🗳️ Poll time!
Which drugs policy would you enact *first*?
🧲 More customs scans at ports
🤝 More collaboration with countries of origin
💊 Work on decreasing drug demand
👮 Bolster law enforcement
🧪 Crack down on local production
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
💬
Quote of the day
Cybersecurity researcher Kevin McSheehan seems to have found an intriguing vulnerability: he
says
a Twitter/X feature that truncates URLs theoretically could’ve allowed foreign intelligence services to hijack the CIA’s instructions for Russians seeking to make covert contact.
It looks like Langley has now fixed the issue.
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you agree with oil sanctions relief for Venezuela in exchange for fairer elections?
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 🖊️ Yes, it's a win-win (25%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
⛔ No, Maduro will take the relief then renege on his pledge (72%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!)  (4%)
Your two cents
:
🖊️
F.T:
“At a time when Saudi oil production has been reduced… it’s a chance worth taking to improve the US economy and help lower inflation. If Maduro reneges, we can reinstate and increase the sanctions.”
✍️
C.L:
“There should be some discussion of sanctions relief and a small incentive with larger relief once the elections are held and determined to have been fair.”
⛔
D.E.E:
“Regimes take advantage of concessions or weakness, then continue business as usual, because they believe (rightly) that there are few repercussions.”