URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/the-world-watches-warner-bros
Title: 🌍 The world watches Warner Bros

Today’s briefing:
— The world watches Warner Bros
— The French make an admission
— One brave ambassador
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. True story time, thanks to an anonymous Intriguer: this one takes us to a small and remote capital in a part of the world first ‘discovered’ by a nepo-baby 16th century explorer.
Not a lot going on there these days, meaning ambassadors have to manufacture random events to generate a headline or two and show HQ just how much impact they’re having.
So one such ambassador duly commissioned a statue of that nepo-baby explorer, and invited the rest of the tiny diplomatic corps to a dull unveiling ceremony. As you might imagine, most other ambassadors then suddenly had pre-existing plans that day, so sent junior-burger minions to watch the statue get unveiled on their behalf.
And that, dear Intriguer, is how our anonymous friend ended up grinning there in the sun for a photo opp that somehow ended up emblazoned across the next front page, misaligned under an entirely un-related headline declaring, ‘Drunk sergeant arrested’.
Anyway, let’s update you on the geopolitics of this big
Netflix/Warner/Paramount
fight.
PS
- For Intriguers in
Sydney
, join our happy hour from 5pm
this Thursday
the 11th in
Surry Hills
.
Register here!
Number of the day
30%
That’s copper’s price rise so far this year, ~ double the S&P500’s return. One recent driver has been US stockpiling in anticipation that President Trump could impose copper tariffs next year, triggering a physical shortage elsewhere.
Merger
Mondays
Wednesdays
Just days after Netflix announced its $83B offer for Hollywood’s legendary Warner Bros studio, rival Paramount has now entered the fray with its own hostile $108B bid.
And we haven’t seen a better love triangle since Edward and Jacob battled it out for Bella’s heart in the
Twilight
saga.
But the world is now watching the free world’s most powerful entertainment giants vie for supremacy, and not just because of the billions at stake or the historic egos at play.
So let’s take a quick look at
five reasons why this merger is global
:
Global screens
Netflix is now available in
over 190 countries
, which is a fancy way of saying it’s now virtually everywhere except China, Russia, North Korea, and (for now) Syria.
The other players in this deal are smaller, but Warner’s HBO Max is still in a cool 100 or so countries, while Paramount Plus reaches a respectable ~40.
So while capitals still impose limits (Vietnam bans
Full Metal Jacket
, for example), that’s still raw US soft power getting beamed into billions of foreign households every night.
We’re also talking about…
Global wallets
The cap tables of these screen giants mean we’re talking about raw US dollars getting pumped into foreign wallets: the single largest foreign investor in Netflix is
Norway
, while Paramount’s third-largest investor is a fund run by
Italy’s powerful Agnelli family
.
And of course, that sweet sweet cash now flows both ways: an estimated
two thirds or more
of all paying Netflix subscribers are now outside the US.
So when you’re reaching global screens and wallets, you’ll draw the attention of…
Global regulatooooors
The bigger your footprint, the longer the list of regulators who’ll want a say in any merger, even if it’s
between US companies.
Take the EU, which has an
unlimited stash of red tape rolls
it can dust off if a proposed deal risks eroding competition and screwing Europe’s consumers.
Word is Europe seems
unlikely to flat-out veto
here, given
a
) this deal could be more vertical than horizontal,
b
) the EU picks its US battles carefully, but also
c
) precedent suggests Europe’s regulators might instead attach conditions to protect (say) local cinemas, streamers, and/or creatives.
Then there’s the…
Global absences
According to Paramount
documents
, China-based tech giant Tencent (of WeChat fame) had originally committed $1B towards the takeover bid, alongside pledges from the Saudi, Emirati, and Qatari sovereign wealth funds.
And just a decade ago that kind of easy cash would’ve made Hollywood execs quiver with delight between Arnold Palmers up at Yamashiro. But
times have changed
.
Some of the execs were smart enough to realise that this kind of structure (particularly the China angle) would trigger
😨
gasp… “
CFIUS review
”.
That’s the secretive
Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States
, which has broad powers to block foreign investment on national security grounds. These days, your best CFIUS strategy is to avoid CFIUS altogether, which is why a revised deal then ditched Tencent and muzzled the others (ie, leaving the Saudis et al with no operational say).
But maybe even a CFIUS review could’ve been a little more predictable compared to…
Global personalities
Notwithstanding the world’s vast teams of lawyers, economists, and bureaucrats exploring complex philosophical questions to determine the optimal outcome in each antitrust case, big competition decisions are always
inherently political
.
Yet the notable thing in this case is how much the decider-in-chief (President Trump) is saying the quiet bit out loud, confirming he’ll indeed be
personally involved
.
So beyond the technical risk this merger could breach the classic 30% US market share threshold, capitals will also be watching for further clues into how Trump wields US power, with early hints Paramount now hopes to
pull an Nvidia
*
(ie, go direct to the president).
Anyway, let’s close where we opened, shall we? If this is all like a
Twilight
love triangle, then maybe we already know where Donald Trump stands:
firmly on Team Edward
.
Intrigue’s Take
There was a funny joke about how the obvious solution here is to just let both Netflix and Paramount get one Warner brother each.
Anyway, this merger fascinates us because of the tensions it highlights:
First
, there’s the tension between Trump viewing big decisions through a
dealmaker
’s lens, versus the risk this then leaves core national interests (whether AI chip controls or long-standing alliances) up for horse-trading.
Second
, there’s the long-running tension between a US antitrust system wanting to manage corporate
dominance
at home, versus a US foreign policy system mindful of the benefits of bigger firms exerting dominance abroad.
And
third
, there’s the tension of a deal that, even if it clears any regulatory hurdles in the US, still has to clear a growing track of hurdles abroad as capitals cringe at some of the cultural sovereignty and digital
dependency
implications, or simply see it as another way to extract some sweet sweet US concessions.
So while it’s fun to focus on the love triangle between Netflix, Warner, and Paramount, or the
Twilight
one between Edward, Jacob, and Bella, there’s really a much bigger triangle playing out here between markets, politics, and raw geopolitical power.
Sound even smarter:
*
Paramount boss David Ellison reportedly got his dad Larry (the Oracle billionaire) to call Trump directly in opposition to the rival Netflix bid. The Paramount proposal also lists Trump’s son-in-law (Kushner) as a key financing partner.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇺🇦
UKRAINE — Ready your ballot.
Responding to President Trump’s suggestion that President Zelensky is clinging to power, the Ukrainian leader has announced he’ll hold elections within three months if the US and others guarantee security. (
BBC
)
Comment
: Zelensky still polls slightly ahead of Zaluzhny, the star general / rival he sent away to London as ambassador. But Zelensky’s aim here seems less about any election, which is constitutionally prohibited during martial law and practically impossible without either a ceasefire (something Putin rejects) or US security guarantees (something Trump rejects). Rather, Zelensky seems to be reminding everyone that the root issue here is not Ukraine’s democracy, but Putin’s invasion.
🇨🇳
CHINA — Not so fast.
Beijing authorities are reportedly now planning to
limit
China’s access to Nvidia’s advanced H200 chips, just after President Trump’s shock decision to allow their export to China. (
FT
$)
Comment
: If true, this could mean at least three things: first, whether the US sells these top chips or not, it suggests China wants to be the master of its own tech destiny; second, that potentially undermines one of DC’s pro-sale arguments about keeping China hooked on US tech to undermine its self-sufficiency push; but third, reports of rampant chip smuggling and other work-arounds suggest China’s end-users still want and need US chips no matter what signals come out of Beijing or DC. It’s a reminder US chips are still ahead. We just don’t know for how long.
🇰🇿
KAZAKHSTAN — Mission accomplished.
An American astronaut and two Russian cosmonauts have landed in Kazakhstan after their eight-month mission aboard the International Space Station. (
Times of Central Asia
)
Comment:
Space is one of the few areas of US-Russia cooperation that’s survived Putin’s invasion — that’s partly out of operational necessity, but also partly a historic, symbolic reminder of our shared humanity, and our ability to step back from the brink.
🇫🇷
FRANCE — Yeah, about last weekend.
Perhaps feeling a little jeally at all the attention Nigeria got for helping thwart Benin’s recent coup attempt, Paris has now revealed it also played a role in the former French colony, offering both logistical and intelligence support. (
Reuters
)
🇻🇳
VIETNAM
— We’re out.
Japan has cited unfeasibly tight timeframes in its decision to withdraw from plans to build Vietnam’s Ninh Thuan 2 nuclear power plant, complicating Vietnam’s efforts to avoid the energy shortages that’ve hit its standing as a manufacturing alternative to China. (
The Star
)
Comment
: Japan’s ‘timeframe’ reasoning, while plausible, likely also obscures the reality of Vietnam’s tricky regulatory environment, Japan’s post-Fukushima rethink, and (relatedly) limited interest from Japan’s risk-averse firms. Of course, that potentially opens doors for others like Russia, already slated to build the other plant (though construction hasn’t started on that one yet either).
🇵🇪
PERU — Tanks a lot.
Seoul has signed a big deal to supply Peru with 54 K2 battle tanks and 141 wheeled armored vehicles, in South Korea’s largest LatAm defence deal to date. (
Chosun
)
Comment
: Beyond Peru’s desire for military modernisation and a bit of heft amid a rapidly changing world, this also looks like an attempt to diversify its traditional defence partnerships beyond its old Soviet kit and today’s US-China race.
🇧🇫
BURKINA FASO — He said, he said.
Burkina Faso has released 11 Nigerian military personnel, rejecting their claims of an emergency C-130 landing and instead alleging they unlawfully violated the West African nation’s airspace. (
Guardian
)
Comment
: The sensitivity here is over the fact regional powerbroker Nigeria deployed forces to block last week’s attempted coup in Benin. And that’s clearly rattled the region’s other juntas who all came out against Nigeria’s emergency landing. So one takeaway is how we might now just be a miscalculation away from outright conflict.
Extra Intrigue
The Intrigue jobs board
💼
Policy internship @
Australian Mission to the WTO
in Geneva
Intel and crisis analyst
@
IBM
in Bangalore, India
Latin America research analyst
@
Bloomberg
in Sao Paulo
Advisor, armed forces
@
Red Cross
in Washington, D.C.
Film of the day
Credits: Austrian Cultural Forum
Washingtonians were in for a treat last night as the Austrian embassy screened a film that’s been generating a bit of buzz on the festival circuit:
The Last Ambassador.
It follows the true story of
Manizha Bakhtari
, the woman serving as Afghanistan’s ambassador to Vienna when the Taliban retook her homeland and started aggressively stripping back basic rights for women and girls.
Bakhtari herself was at the screening along with the film’s Austrian director, Natalie Halla, sharing further insights into the ambassador’s defiance of Taliban calls to resign, plus her quiet
Daughters
program helping Afghan schoolgirls pursue education.
Ultimately, the ambassador describes her stance like this: “
I do not represent a government, but I represent my people.
”
Today’s poll
Who do you think will win this bid to buy Warner Bros?
💻 Netflix
📺 Paramount
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
What do you think will happen with Yemen?
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️
🤝
A two-state solution  (33%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🔫
Continued conflict  (61%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
💩
Direct UAE-Saudi spat  (6%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write us!) (0%)
Your two cents:
🔫
R.C.F:
“It's in the interest of far too many parties, both within Yemen and outside of it, that this conflict is prolonged (and profitable), for it to ever really end. ”
🤝
Z.W:
“Unlike Israel… in the case of Yemen the two state solution can possibly work.”