URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/geopolitics-football
Title: 🌍 The geopolitics of football

IN TODAY’S EDITION
1️⃣ The geopolitics of football
2️⃣ Did a nuke agency just buy the internet?
3️⃣ Shipwreck of the day
Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
I’m a tad jealous of the 15,000 folks who gathered in London’s O2 arena last night: not only did they get to see rock band
The Killers
but, to everyone’s surprise, the band hit pause on their own gig to instead livestream the final few minutes of England v The Netherlands in the Euro 2024 semifinals (soccer) over in Germany.
Moments later, England clinched the win (2-1), the crowd got showered in red and white confetti, and everyone went wild as
The Killers
ripped straight into their famous hit, ‘Mr Brightside’. The
footage
on social media looks wild.
I love how sport (and entertainment) can produce these electric, unscripted moments. The
Euro tournament
does, however, also get embroiled in its fair share of geopolitics, which we’ll explore in today’s briefing. Onwards!
THE HEADLINES
More Democrats and their donors speak out.
Several more
have expressed doubts
about President Biden’s re-election bid, despite efforts from his administration to quell concerns about his age and fitness. Nancy Pelosi has said “
time is running short
” for the president to decide whether to pull out, while actor George Clooney has written an
op-ed
in The New York Times titled ‘
I Love Joe Biden. But We Need a New Nominee’
.
Macron calls for a mainstream coalition.
Speaking out for the first time
since Sunday’s parliamentary election, French President Emmanuel Macron has called on political parties that “
identify with republican institutions, rule of law, parliamentarianism, a pro-European stance and French independence to have a sincere, loyal dialogue
” towards forming a new government. His wording seems designed to exclude both the hard right
National Rally
and the hard left
France Unbowed
.
Israel orders evacuation of Gaza City.
The Israeli military has dropped leaflets
ordering “
everyone in Gaza City
” to evacuate
in preparation for a renewed operation in the enclave’s north. Over the past two weeks, the military has re-entered zones in central and northern Gaza it had previously declared clear of Hamas. For its part, Hamas says this could derail renewed efforts to negotiate a ceasefire and hostage deal.
UAE hands down life sentences to 43 activists.
Over 80 lawyers, academics, and activists who were reaching the end of their prison time were
unexpectedly sentenced again
this week. A majority received additional prison time, with 43 getting life. The authorities accused the men, who’d called for political reforms, of starting a “
terrorist
” organisation.
TOP STORY
The geopolitics of UEFA football
UEFA = ‘Union of European Football Associations’
With Europe’s UEFA men’s football (sorry, ‘soccer’) championship final happening this Sunday, what better time to have a look at the geopolitics of it all?
Let’s dig in.
‘
The Euros
’ is the top tournament for Europe’s national football teams and it’s a big deal. It’s the second-most watched football championship in the world after the FIFA World Cup, and the 2020 edition (which was confusingly held in 2021 due to Covid) had a cumulative audience of over
5 billion
worldwide.
The first Euros kicked off back in 1960, and immediately hit turbulence:
That very year, Spanish dictator General Francisco Franco banned his team from travelling to Moscow to play against
the Soviets
Franco’s
Spain
then hosted the next edition, but got boycotted by others like West Germany, and this sort of thing has just kept happening
Eg, UN sanctions prevented the
Yugoslav
team from playing in 1992, as the state splintered into several entities and descended into war.
Of course, 2024 has been no exception, so here are four moments where geopolitics crushed too many beers and streaked across the Euro pitch:
An
🇦🇱
Albanian striker got banned after leading ‘nationalist’ chants
When his team drew against Croatia, Mirlind Daku celebrated by pulling out a megaphone and leading fans in some provocative chants against Serbia and North Macedonia (reflecting long-running ethnic tensions and periodic armed conflict in the region).
Daku later apologised, but it might all explain why the dude only got
five minutes
of game-time the whole series, and why Albania returned home without a medal though as UEFA’s most-fined nation. And speaking of fines…
🇷🇸
Serbia copped a $10k fine after fans waved ‘provocative’ flags
Serbia doesn’t recognise
Kosovo
’s 2008 declaration of independence, and their border skirmishes have repeatedly threatened to escalate. That’s why it was more than a little edgy when Serbian fans brandished flags showing Kosovo within its borders, plus a ‘never surrender’ slogan.
Separately, a Kosovar reporter got banned for responding to Serbian fans with an ‘eagle’ hand gesture reflecting Albania’s flag (most Kosovars are ethnic Albanians). And speaking of hand gestures…
A
🇹🇷
Turkish centre-back got banned for an ‘extremist’ hand gesture
After scoring his second goal against Austria, Merih Demiral did a ‘wolf’ hand gesture that’s actually banned in Austria for its close links to the
Grey Wolves
, an ultra-nationalist Turkish group outlawed in France and elsewhere.
Demiral’s handiwork also irritated Germany’s interior minister, who
insisted
“
the symbols of Turkish right-wing extremists have no place in our stadiums
”. But
others
argue it’s a historical (rather than political) symbol, and Turkey’s president defended Demiral, insisting the guy was just “
showing his excitement
”.
Interestingly, the incident happened just as a trial kicked off in Turkey over the 2022 murder of the former Grey Wolves leader, Sinan Ates. Meanwhile…
🇷🇺
Russia is banned, but
🇧🇾
Belarus (its ally) isn’t
Putin’s decision to invade his neighbour has not only got
half a million
of his own soldiers wiped out, plus international warrants for his own arrest, but also bans on Russia participating in all kinds of tournaments (including this UEFA one).
Host country Germany tried to get
Belarus
banned too, because Belarus has allowed Russia to invade from Belarusian territory. But UEFA ultimately declined. Instead, it
ruled
that Belarus and Ukraine couldn’t play in the same group.
And all of the above is before we even look at the
governing body itself
: UEFA.
Headquartered in Switzerland, UEFA runs football, futsal, and beach football (lol) in Europe plus Turkey, Azerbaijan, Armenia, Georgia, Kazakhstan, and Israel. It earns
waterfalls of cash
by selling broadcasting, advertising, and tickets.
And yes, when you mix that geography, history, and cashflow, you obviously get intrigue, particularly around who gets to join, and who gets to host.
UEFA’s last big
expansion
took effect in 2016, growing the tournament from 16 to 24 teams - interestingly, some of the biggest members (like Germany and England) opposed it, purportedly on the grounds that it’d dilute the quality.
And there’ve been various
hosting scandals
over the years, like when a Cypriot official accused UEFA committee members of accepting $12M in bribes to support the joint Ukraine-Poland hosting bid for the 2012 tournament. Authorities later
closed
the case due to a lack of evidence.
Anyway, don’t let us stop you from enjoying the final. It’s this Sunday (local time) at Berlin's historic Olympiastadion, featuring England against Spain.
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
There's really no better place where you can learn about the wide variety of offensive hand gestures and chants than a football stadium.
That aside, this tournament has actually been relatively smooth and even delivered some harmless
geopolitical lulz
, like rival fans poking fun at one another
using
their beloved national foods.
It’s mostly all now a benign space to indulge in
old grudges
without resorting to the
old methods
. But yes, beyond the stadium, old methods (war) are now back in vogue again, and that’s going to play out in sports.
For now, the main flashpoints will remain around the
peripheral symbols
: gestures, songs, flags, and who’s allowed to play. That’s because each of these things, and the decisions around them, reflect deeper questions around what we accept as normal. And deep down, that’s arguably what we fight about.
Also worth noting:
The
next two tournaments
in 2028 and 2032 will be held in the UK and Ireland, and Italy and Turkey respectively.
Current UEFA President Aleksander Ceferin has been
accused
of making key appointments on the basis of loyalty rather than ability.
The parallel
Copa America
men’s tournament is older (founded in 1916) and smaller (16 teams). Its final is also this Sunday, with Argentina facing Colombia in Florida’s Miami Gardens.
A MESSAGE FROM PROJECT SYNDICATE
Your Gateway to Global Perspectives: $1 Trial for 3 Months
See the world through the eyes of the world’s leading thinkers with Project Syndicate. For just $1, you can gain three months of unlimited access to original, engaging, and thought-provoking analysis by renowned voices in economics, politics, technology, culture, and more.
Begin your trial today and start reading informed, nuanced insights that matter.
START YOUR TRIAL
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇨🇳
China
: According to Reuters, India is accelerating plans to develop hydro plants near its border with China, prompting China’s foreign ministry to
double down on its territorial claims
. The dispute involves an area in the Himalayas which both India and China claim as their own.
🇩🇪
Germany
:
After years of debate, Berlin has announced it’s cutting ties with China’s Huawei,
booting the telecoms giant from its 5G networks
by 2029. The US and other Western powers have long warned about Huawei’s risk to national security, and have announced network bans in recent years following Australia’s earlier decision in 2018.
🇹🇭
Thailand
: In its first senate race since the 2014 coup, Thailand has
elected 200 new senators
who’ll replace the previous military-appointed upper house. Thailand’s senate no longer gets a say in selecting the country’s prime minister, but it remains pivotal in safeguarding the royalist establishment’s interests.
🇲🇽
Mexico
: President-elect Claudia Sheinbaum has announced she’s
planning to build three passenger train lines
from Mexico City to several cities on the US border, nearly doubling the country’s current debt-financed rail-building program. When asked what this means for his country, the outgoing president (‘AMLO’) said “
jobs, lots of jobs.”
🇮🇱
Israel
: Defence Minister Yoav Gallant has said the country plans to issue
draft notices to previously exempt ultra-Orthodox
Jewish men in the coming weeks. Ultra-Orthodox groups have long resisted military service on religious grounds but ultimately lost their case at the Israeli supreme court last month.
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Here’s what’s happening in other worlds
Tech
: A US nuclear agency (the
Defense Threat Reduction Agency
) has reportedly
bought access to a tool that covers more than 90% of the world’s internet traffic
, as part of a vulnerability testing exercise for the US and its allies.
Art:
Tasmania’s famous Museum of Old and New Art is now
embroiled in a scandal
after it emerged that its Picasso portraits were actually fakes.
History
: While trudging through a sewer in Bulgaria (presumably for professional purposes), archaeologists have stumbled upon a well-preserved Roman statue of the
ancient Greek god Hermes
.
SHIPWRECK OF THE DAY
Credits: Royal Geographic Society/PA.
One of the world’s most famous shipwrecks is getting an extra layer of protection after the 56 signatories of the Antarctic Treaty System backed plans to expand the conservation zone around Ernest Shackleton’s shipwreck.
Shackleton (an explorer) and his crew of 27 set sail on the
Endurance
for Antarctica in 1914, hoping to make the first full crossing of the Antarctic. But the ship quickly became trapped in an icepack and sank, leaving the men stranded on the Antarctic ice. Miraculously, all the crew survived their two-year trial, cementing Shackleton as one of history’s greatest explorers.
The Endurance’s shipwreck was discovered only in 2022, 107 years after it sank.
DAILY POLL
How do you think the Euro football hosting rights should be awarded?
🏆 Whoever wins should host (like Eurovision)
🙋 By committee vote (as present)
🎩 By random draw
🗳️ By an independent committee
⚽ Rotating between EUFA member states
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Would you be more likely to buy a pricier gadget if it came with a supply chain guarantee?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🌳
Yep, a small premium is worth the global impact (42%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️
🔎
Nope, I don't think I can trust the guarantees (38%)
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
📱
Nope, things are already too expensive (18%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!)  (2%)
Your two cents:
🌳
B.B:
“So long as consumer protection agencies can verify that the supply chain guarantee from the company is valid, a premium is understandable and might encourage other businesses to follow suit.”
🔎
R.H:
“I would REALLY want to trust the guarantee, but considering how corporations game the system with things like ‘net-zero emissions’, I don't see how I could.”
📱
I.B:
“Purchasing a pricier gadget at this time will not happen. The future? Maybe.”
✍️
J.G:
“I buy everything (almost!) used/gently used. Or new old stock.“
Was this forwarded to you? We're a team of ex-diplomats producing a concise and engaging geopolitical briefing for 100k+ leaders each day.
It’s free to subscribe
.