URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/fed-hikes-interest-rates
Title: 🌍 The Fed hikes interest rates again

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Remember Winnie the Pooh? Well, the little guy has a horror film (seriously), but it’s been
“mysteriously” cancelled
in Hong Kong. Perhaps the city’s legendary cinema scene suddenly got squeamish? Or maybe (definitely), it’s got something to do with the Chinese President’s dislike of
being compared to the Pooh
.
👋
A warm welcome to the 1,587 subscribers who joined us just yesterday!
Today’s briefing is a 4.2 min read:
🇺🇸
The
US
Federal Reserve jacks interest rates.
🇨🇦
Canadian
intelligence accuses China of election interference.
➕
Plus:
The tiny kingdom of Bhutan becomes a democracy on this day in history, how the papers are covering the US Navy in the South China Sea, and by popular demand… an intriguing quiz to wrap up the week.
🎧
Today’s Intrigue Outloud:
Go deeper on El Salvador’s unprecedented ‘state of exception’ driving a spectacular drop in crime (at a price).
🎧 Intrigue Outloud
🗺️ AROUND THE WORLD
🇰🇵
North Korea
: Pyongyang has marked the end of joint US-South Korea military exercises by
carrying out a series of missile launches
. North Korea accuses the two allies of staging an “invasion rehearsal”.
🇧🇾
Belarus
: UN chief António Guterres is trying to convince the EU to
loosen sanctions on Belarusian fertiliser exports
and bolster global food production. Several Baltic states oppose loosening the sanctions, which aim to squeeze Belarus for supporting Russia’s invasion of Ukraine.
🇮🇳
India
: Rahul Gandhi, India’s main opposition leader, has been
sentenced to two years in prison
for a 2019 comment suggesting folks named Modi (such as India’s prime minister) are thieves. He’ll appeal the ruling, which comes a year before India’s general elections.
🇧🇷
Brazil
: President Lula da Silva heads to China this weekend
with nearly 250 business executives
. More than a quarter of them hail from Brazil’s meat sector, which depends heavily on sales to China.
🇱🇧
Lebanon
: The Lebanese currency has sunk to a new low against the US dollar, prompting hundreds of citizens, mainly retired soldiers, to stage
anti-government protests
.
🇺🇸
US | ECONOMICS
Interest rates are still climbing, but their ascent has slowed down. Data: Federal Reserve.
Fed raises rates, but uncertainty reigns
Briefly:
The US Federal Reserve
increased interest rates by another quarter point
on Wednesday, seeking to cool a hot economy without further spooking jittery markets. US rates are now at their highest level since 2007.
Most economists were (by Wednesday) expecting this decision. But just a week ago, things weren’t so clear:
After four bank failures in 11 days, some thought the economy didn’t need the Fed’s help to cool down
And
others
worried a decision
not
to raise rates might’ve spooked markets, by suggesting the Fed held concerns for the financial system’s stability
The Fed Chair (Jerome Powell) was clearly mindful of all this. And initial systemic fears seemed to have receded by Wednesday. So he took the calculated risk that he could tame inflation without spreading further financial turmoil.
Intrigue’s take:
Imagine you’re flying a plane. A cockpit alarm goes off, but it’s not yet clear what it means. You’ve got to make a decision, but it might make things worse. Oh, and it’ll be a year before we know if you’ve saved the day or crashed the plane.
That’s Powell’s job right now. And given the Fed’s global influence, we’re all passengers. The last time a pilot faced this kind of decision was 2007-8 and, though the facts were different, we all know how that ended. We’ll find out next year whether Powell got it right this time.
Also worth noting:
Central banks around the world (eg,
Philippines
,
Taiwan
,
Saudi Arabia, Qatar
,
Switzerland
, and
the UK
) quickly followed the US Fed’s lead and raised rates.
Financial markets are functioning, though one analyst described the primary loans market as a
“Scooby Doo ghost town.”
📰
GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES
How different newspapers covered
: China accusing the US Navy of ”illegally” entering the South China Sea.
Links
:
ABC
,
China Daily
,
Hindustan Times
.
Today’s briefing is sponsored by
The Report
Get smarter every day.
Get the latest business, finance and tech news 3x per week – all in a single email. Unbiased. Factual. Objective. The Report is a must-read newsletter loved by over 50,000 readers.
Sign up with one click!
🇨🇦
CANADA | SECURITY
Canadian intelligence accuses China of election interference
Briefly:
A Canadian lawmaker has been accused of secretly helping Beijing at the expense of Canadian interests. Toronto-area representative Han Dong has denied wrongdoing, but on Wednesday night agreed to leave the ruling Liberal Party and sit in Parliament as an independent.
Dong’s
accusers say
he advised China’s consul-general in Toronto to delay the release of two Canadian citizens in China (widely seen as political prisoners), to avoid benefiting China-sceptic voices in the opposition.
His accusers within Canadian intelligence also allege Dong benefited from a
“subtle but effective”
effort by China’s consulate to back his 2019 election campaign.
Meanwhile, Prime Minister Trudeau has already opened a
private inquiry
into alleged election interference in Canada. But as geopolitical divides widen and social media connectivity deepens, election meddling might just get worse.
Intrigue’s take:
Canada isn’t the only Western government dealing with election interference. Australia’s PM
Malcolm Turnbull
introduced world-first foreign interference laws back in 2017 after similar concerns surfaced down under.
And it’s a tough nut to crack:
Every government wants to protect the integrity of its democracy
Every intelligence agency wants to protect its secrets, and
Every modern society wants to avoid isolating citizens with roots abroad.
The solution in Canada, Australia and elsewhere seems to be a controlled leak of intel to shine a light on the issue, followed by carefully calibrated public debate.
Then again, Canadians recently got constitutional protection for
the right to flip the bird
, so maybe folks will now think twice about messing with their elections.
Also worth noting:
The Canadian prisoners, Michael Spavor and Michael Kovrig, were
released on 24 September
2021, four days after Canada’s elections.
Canada’s former opposition leader claims his party
lost 8 or 9 seats
in parliament due to interference by Beijing.
Rumours
emerged overnight that New Zealand is quietly toughening its own approach to foreign interference.
👀
EXTRA INTRIGUE
A few recommendations from Team Intrigue
to get you cartwheeling into the weekend. If you have:
10 mins
: Read this article on the similarities between
China’s demographic challenges
and Japan’s lost decade. ($)
37 mins:
Listen to ‘
Paid in Blood
’ from ‘A
Matter of Degrees
’, about landownership in Brazil and deforestation in the Amazon.
1 hour:
Watch ‘
Myanmar Diaries’
, detailing life after the 2021 military coup from the perspective of everyday people turned journalists.
📜
ON THIS DAY IN HISTORY
People standing in line for their first national council election, Dec 2007. Credits: Reuters.
Bhutan officially becomes a democracy…
On 24 March 2008, Bhutan held its first general election as it transitioned from an absolute monarchy to a parliamentary democracy. Today the Himalayan kingdom is rated as ‘partly free’ by democracy NGO Freedom House.
❓ FRIDAY QUIZ
1) Who was the French diplomat who played a key role in negotiating the Treaty of Paris in 1783, which ended the American Revolutionary War?
a) Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord
b) François de Chateaubriand
c) Charles Gravier, Comte de Vergennes
d) Jean Monnet
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) In 1998, Ecuador signed a peace agreement to resolve a long-standing border dispute between itself and which other country?
a) Colombia
b) Venezuela
c) Chile
d) Peru
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) Which of the following US states holds a special place in Chinese President Xi Jinping’s heart? (attentive readers should know this one 👀)
a) Iowa
b) Texas
c) California
d) Wyoming
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Answers:
1-c, 2-d, 3-a.