URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/the-alaska-summit-was-there-a-winner-6e114abec7f9a53f
Title: 🌍 The Alaska Summit: was there a winner?

Today’s briefing:
— The Alaska Summit: was there a winner?
— A shock result in Bolivia
— Do NOT bring this to a Starbucks in Korea
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. I’ve always loved what an allied diplomat in Washington once described to me as “
the most DC thing
” he ever saw. It was like 2am and this envoy was returning from a Saturday night on the town when he noticed, on his quiet Georgetown street, a single top-floor light above, illuminating the dark street down below.
As my pal got closer he glanced up and saw it, the most DC thing ever: a 30-something guy on a treadmill at 2am, absolutely ripping out a new personal best with an intensity you’d rarely see in the gym let alone at home at 2am, presumably after spending his entire Saturday putting the finishing touches on a senator’s briefing pack or whatever.
Anyway you can bet this weekend has had quite a few
top-floor-2am-lights
as staffers across the city prepare for today’s last-minute meetings between President Trump and leaders from Ukraine and across Europe, all still digesting
what just happened in Alaska
.
Number of the day
3.2%
That’s the tiny vote-share won by Bolivia’s ruling socialists, with locals using Sunday’s first-round election to oust the Evo Morales-founded movement after two decades in power. A dark horse centrist (Paz) will now face a right-leaning former president (Quiroga) in October’s run-off, Bolivia’s first since its 1982 return to democracy.
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine
So Alaska ended much as we foreshadowed: no deal. But 'no deal' doesn't mean 'empty-handed'. Here's a quick tally of the 'wins' each side is now claiming (agree or not).
🇷🇺
What did Putin win?
Putin’s arguable wins fall into three categories:
perception
,
isolation
, and
negotiation
:
On the
perception
front, Kremlin propagandists argue that in a single afternoon, Putin shrugged off years of Western pressure to instead take a ride in a US presidential limo and stride along a US red carpet (laid by US servicemembers on their knees).
On the
isolation
front, critics say this unwound years of isolation since Putin’s invasion, undermining ICC arrest warrants while paving the way for others to re-engage too.
And as for the actual
negotiations
? Folks argue Putin’s wins include:
First
,
no new sanctions
, months after President Trump’s
peace-or-sanctions
threat: Secretary of State Rubio is now arguing any new sanctions would be proof talks have failed, rather than (say) a tool to shape Putin’s approach to those talks.
Second
,
no ceasefire
, months after President Trump's ceasefire demands: he’s now
suggesting
talks should focus on a
full
peace
(not ceasefire) deal
. His envoy (Witkoff) frames this as a Trump win, citing positive progress. But others frame this pivot as a Putin win, because it means
a
) Ukraine must still negotiate with Putin’s gun to its head, and
b
) it hints at Putin's continued “
pervoprichiny
” (root causes) demands, including for Ukraine’s "
de-Nazification
" (oust Kyiv’s elected government), “
de-militarization
” (gut its military), and “
neutralisation
” (stop Kyiv from seeking outside help).
Third, no territorial concessions
: details are still emerging, and Witkoff says Putin made concessions, though these still seem to relate to
Ukraine’s own land
, while demanding Ukraine hand over its own heavily fortified cities in the east — locals fear Putin would just use them as a launchpad for future attacks on a Ukraine presumably wracked with political strife over such massive concessions.
Meanwhile…
🇺🇸
What did President Trump win?
Trump’s arguable wins fit the same categories:
perception
,
isolation
, and
negotiation
:
On
perception
, supporters say the US president flexed US strength by startling Putin with a sudden B2 flyover as he walked past F-22 Raptors. That, combined with the event’s "
Pursuing Peace
" signage (plus a personal
appeal
from the First Lady), all reflected the president's
peace through strength
mantra.
On the
isolation
front, the idea is if years of icing Putin haven't stopped the war, re-engagement is worth a shot. And that brings scrutiny, like when a US reporter shouted out if Putin would stop killing civilians (Putin didn’t answer).
Then there's the
negotiation
: the president's initial tweets didn't reveal much, but his top envoys (Witkoff and Rubio) are now suggesting Putin might've shown openness to…
First
,
a US security guarantee for Ukraine?
Witkoff
suggests
it’d be like NATO's article 5 (an attack on one is an attack on all), which Europe has long wanted as a way to prevent more Putin attacks. But Putin has always rejected a
NATO
guarantee, so this lesser (US and maybe European) version is doing the rounds as a possible compromise.
Second, a European-led 'reassurance' force for Ukraine?
This idea is also
resurfacing
, with European troops potentially adding to any US-backed guarantees, though details remain scant beyond possible Trump backing.
Third, a Russian commitment not to invade again?
Witkoff is flagging the possibility Russia could pass a law pledging no further attacks. Aside from what such a pledge would be worth (Putin has already broken
several
by invading Ukraine), and the obvious loopholes (Putin has passed laws to, say, redefine Ukrainian land as his own, and abolish term limits), this idea seems aimed at Ukraine, which has always rejected land concessions in part because they’re banned in its constitution: so Putin is arguing “
if we can amend our laws, you can amend yours
”.
Anyway, President Trump is
hinting
at big progress as he prepares for today’s last-minute summit with Ukraine plus the UK, Italy, Germany, France, Finland, the EU, and NATO.
Intrigue’s Take
There’s been
real shock
in Europe over the weekend, as it digests what it sees as a US pivot back to aligning more with Putin’s perspectives. The cigar-chomping capitalists at the UK’s
Financial Times
, for example,
described
Friday’s summit as an "
embarrassing failure
".
The UK’s defence ministry also came out with
a remarkable intelligence update
, directly pushing back on Putin’s vast territorial claims by noting that, at his current rate, Putin would need
another
four years
(and
a million more casualties
) just to seize the four Ukrainian provinces he’s already claiming as his own.
And that reminds us of the old George Shultz quote: “
negotiations are a euphemism for
capitulation
if the shadow of power is not cast across the bargaining table.
” Why? First, because the US isn’t yet casting its own full shadow (eg, it’s still withholding further sanctions and arms). But second, because Putin’s own shadow isn’t as big as he’d like us to believe.
Sound even smarter:
President Trump has pushed back on any suggestion Putin could claim wins in Alaska, though has now
reiterated
calls for Ukraine (not Putin) to end this war.
Talk of any new US security guarantees is reviving debate in Ukraine about the 1994
Budapest Memorandum
, via which Ukraine agreed to hand over the world’s third-largest nuclear arsenal (inherited from the USSR) in return for US-UK (and Russian) security promises.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
Minderoo
Global Plastics Treaty Talks Stuck in Neutral
INC-5.2 (the latest treaty talks) have ended in a stalemate after marathon negotiations.
Governments agreed to strengthen health protections, but still left toxic chemical controls to patchwork national measures—missing the chance for global standards.
With no date for INC-5.3, and no agreed draft to form the basis for future talks, the path forward is uncertain. Some countries are even pushing to weaken the treaty’s scope.
Stay up to date on our work toward a strong and effective plastics treaty
here
.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
Pinky promise.
During a Fox interview focused more on Russia-Ukraine, President Trump has indicated that China’s Xi Jinping once pledged he wouldn’t invade Taiwan during Trump’s presidency. (
Guardian
)
Comment:
It’s possible this kind of exchange has more to do with China’s military preparedness (or lack thereof) than anything else. A former CIA director (Burns) famously suggested Xi had ordered his military to be ready for an invasion by 2027 (President Trump’s final year in office).
🇨🇾
CYPRUS
-
Crossed the line.
A British politician has resigned his post as trade envoy to Turkey after visiting the
Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus
and meeting the local de-facto leader, despite the UK (along with everyone but Turkey) not recognising such a republic. (
Guardian
)
🇲🇾
MALAYSIA
-
Second-hand.
Malaysia’s largely-ceremonial king has warned his country’s defense ministry against buying used military aircraft, citing the 1980s-era purchase of 80 accident-prone US Skyhawks as a cautionary tale. He’s urging the government to cancel its planned acquisition of old Black Hawk choppers. (
Strait Times
)
Comment:
It’s a reminder that while US arms are mostly considered top-of-class, there’ve been lemons over the decades still shaping decisions today.
🇵🇪
PERU
-
A grim record.
Peru now has four former presidents in prison at the same time (potentially a world record) after a judge ordered pretrial detention of one-time ambassador to Canada and ex-leader Martín Vizcarra (2018-2020) on corruption charges. (
Bloomberg
$)
🇲🇱
MALI
-
French-backed coup?
The ruling junta claims it’s foiled an attempted coup, arresting two generals plus a French embassy staffer accused of orchestrating the plot on behalf of French intelligence. The French foreign ministry is denying the allegations, describing the man’s detention as a violation of diplomatic immunity. (
Al Jazeera
)
Extra Intrigue
🤣
Your weekly round-up of the world’s lighter headlines
Starbucks Korea has had to ban customers from setting up full
desktop PCs, printers, and even office cubicle dividers
in stores.
Lawmakers in Bahrain have started calling for
a ban on adult pacifiers
.
An LA thief has stolen
$30k worth of Labubus
(the viral collectable furry monster).
A zoo in Denmark is inviting folks to
donate their unwanted pets
to feed its predators.
And three German postal workers have started
biking all the way to Finland
to deliver Christmas letters to Santa.
Map of the day
Credits: Equal Earth Project.
If you ever need to torpedo a dinner party by triggering an argument, try bringing up the subject of maps. Sure, people argue about the boundaries, but the world map itself continues to stir debate, with critics arguing our world’s classic
Mercator projection
style from the 16th century shapes attitudes by distorting actual country and continent sizes.
On a Mercator map, for example, Africa and Greenland appear roughly the same size, whereas in reality Africa is 14 times larger. That’s why the African Union has now officially joined efforts to ditch the
Mercator
map in favour of the
Equal Earth map
(shown above).
Today’s poll
What do you think will come of today's summit with Ukraine / Europe?
🤔 President Trump respects several of these leaders; he'll rethink his approach
😠 Trump is losing patience and will double-down against Ukraine
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Last Thursday’s poll:
How do you see [last Friday's] Alaska summit going?
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇷🇺
More sanctions on Russia (14%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇺🇦
More pressure on Ukraine (17%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🤷
No meaningful change (67%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write us!) (2%)
Your two cents:
🤷
D.D:
“Lots of noise, but no real change on the ground or serious diplomatic progress. ”
🇷🇺
E.W:
“Putin will make unreasonable demands. Even if some demands are met, he will continue military actions.”
🇺🇦
M.A:
“If Trump wants to realize his personal ambitions of peacemaker, pressuring Ukraine will give far better results than pressuring Russia.”
🤷
F.G:
“I mean, have we had meaningful change after the multiple talks and summits this year?”