URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/eu-discusses-ukraine-marshall-plan
Title: 🌍 The EU discusses a Ukraine Marshall Plan

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Global summits can be pretty scripted, but every now and then something epic happens. Like this: in 2007, the Venezuelan president kept interrupting a summit. So eventually, the King of Spain lost his cool and blurted out
“
why don’t you shut up?!
”
The incident rocked the Spanish-speaking world, spawning ringtones, t-shirts, mugs, and even a TV show.
Today’s briefing is a 4.2 min read:
🇪🇺
The
EU
explores long-term support for Ukraine.
🛢️
Oil shareholders
aren’t ready to give up oil.
➕
Plus:
Some good news in Sri Lanka, how the papers are covering rising temperatures across Asia, and… the coldest temperature ever recorded.
🎧
Today’s Intrigue Outloud:
AI is changing the way we fight wars.
Listen here!
🗺️ AROUND THE WORLD
🇯🇵
Japan
: Prime Minister Fumio Kishida has sacked his own son from an executive secretary role after
“inappropriate” images of a party
in the PM’s official residence went viral. Kishida’s approval rating had just recently broken above 50%.
🇪🇺
EU
: The EU’s tech chief has announced the bloc is working on a
voluntary AI code of conduct
, to be finalised within weeks. The optional guidelines are intended to help steer industry practice while the EU’s new AI Act slowly makes its way through the legislative process.
🇸🇬
Singapore
: China and Singapore will
set up a high-level defence hotline
in an effort to strengthen crisis comms amid rising tensions in the region. Asia-Pacific security leaders are in Singapore for the annual Shangri-La Dialogue, which runs today (Friday) until Sunday.
🇺🇸
US
: Congress
passed a bill
late last night (Thursday) to suspend Washington’s debt ceiling. The bill now goes to President Biden’s desk for signature before the US hits its borrowing limit on Monday.
🇳🇬
Nigeria
: Incoming President Bola Tinubu used his inaugural address this week to announce the end of
a popular fuel subsidy
, in an effort to repair Nigeria’s finances. The seemingly off-the-cuff comment caused long lines at gas stations across the country.
🇪🇺
EU | GEOPOLITICS
The EU is working on a Ukraine Marshall Plan
Briefly:
The European Commission is reportedly working on a
four-year financing plan
worth tens of billions of euros to help Ukraine rebuild.
Almost a year and a half into Russia’s invasion,
Ukraine’s needs are massive
:
📉
a
$38b
budget deficit this year alone, plus
🏭
$14b
in urgent reconstruction for critical infrastructure just for 2023
And while international support for Ukraine
is strong, it’s still pretty ad hoc:
🇪🇺
Hungary
’s PM has often vetoed EU aid for Ukraine, in an attempt at leverage to unblock EU funding for his own country, and
🇺🇸
US
elections next year inject some uncertainty around US assistance
So that’s why the EU is seeking to put Ukraine’s aid on a longer-term footing. But getting unanimous support across the EU system will be a tough slog.
And that’s just on the financing.
In parallel yesterday (Thursday), 47
leaders from wider Europe
gathered in a Moldovan castle
(just 8km from a Russian-controlled separatist enclave) to discuss
security
assistance for Ukraine.
Intrigue’s take:
World leaders are often better at talking than walking; more comfortable in poetry than prose. But so far, the West’s support for Ukraine has done both: leaders have walked the talk with
$168B
in aid already.
But placing that aid on a longer-term footing means threading it through more needles: elections, budgetary schedules, gamesmanship. And that won’t be easy.
So at this initial stage, the EU’s long-term aid package looks less like a Marshall Plan and more like a Maybe Plan. And Ukraine will need something firmer.
Also worth noting:
The IMF approved a
$15.6B financing package
for Ukraine in March.
Moldova secured EU candidate status in June of last year. Since then, it’s accused Russia of
planning to overthrow the current Western-aligned government
.
📰
GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES
How different newspapers covered
: Rising temperatures across Asia.
Links
:
The Straits Times
,
Al Jazeera
,
Daily Star
.
International Intrigue at 2023 NATO Youth Summit
Don’t miss Intrigue Co-founder John Fowler next week.
On June 5, young people from Europe and North America will join a transatlantic conversation at the 2023 NATO Youth Summit, which takes place in Brussels and Washington, D.C.
Our very own John Fowler will lead an activity on how to be an Open Source Intelligence (OSINT) expert. Other sessions include:
Countering & Deterring Adversarial Threats: Russian Invasion of Ukraine
Diplomacy Through Sports: A Conversation With Leaders On and Off the Field
& more!
Check it out.
🛢️ US | CLIMATE & ENERGY
Chevron is one of the companies keeping its gas tank full
US oil majors reject climate change proposals
Briefly:
Shareholders of ExxonMobil and Chevron, the two largest US oil companies, rejected climate-focussed resolutions at their annual meetings on Wednesday (31 May).
And the votes weren’t even close.
Around 10% of both ExxonMobil and Chevron shareholders supported proposals to align emissions targets with the 2015 Paris Agreement. Only one of the dozen proposals at Exxon (on reporting its methane emissions) received more than 20% support.
And momentum seems to be slipping: last year, 28% and 33% of Exxon and Chevron shareholders (respectively) supported Paris-alignment proposals.
Intrigue’s take:
Remember what investing was like in 2020/2021? Meme stocks, crypto, animatronic apes… it was wild. But elsewhere, another approach was booming: environmental, social and governance (ESG) investing.
This latest news out of Chevron and Exxon
suggests maybe ESG momentum is fading. And yet, we
only just wrote
about how solar investment will surpass oil investment this year for the first time. So… what’s happening?
Capital is peering into the future: some (like solar investors) see a green future just around the corner; others (like oil and gas shareholders) think it’s still a way off. And either way, their decisions today will shape the future we get.
Also worth noting:
A shareholder activist group behind this week’s proposals,
Follow This
,
said
it was
“incomprehensible that most investors still accept the US super majors’ refusal to cut emissions this decade.”
Support for climate-focussed proposals among European shareholders has been marginally higher: in recent weeks,
around 20% of Shell and BP
shareholders voted to accelerate transition plans.
👀
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Team Intrigue is back with some weekend recommendations! If you have:
10 mins:
Read about how machine learning is helping winemakers identify their
best vintage champagne
.
30 mins:
Make this
no-cook gazpacho
- easy, fragrant and perfect for those of you enjoying spring and summer weather.
1.5 hour
: Watch ‘
The Sound of 007
’, a documentary about the music behind the world’s beloved spy.
📊
CHART OF THE DAY
Sri Lanka’s interest rate. Credit: TradingEconomics. Source: Central Bank of Sri Lanka.
Sri Lanka’s Central Bank
announced
yesterday (Thursday) it’s lowering interest rates for the first time since the country declared bankruptcy last year. Foreign capital has returned to Sri Lanka since it secured a $3B IMF bailout in March.
🗳️ QUIZ TIME!
1) What is the lowest-ever recorded temperature?
a) -102.0 °C (-151.6 °F)
b) -89.2 °C (-128.6 °F)
c) -94.7 °C (-138.5 °F)
d) -76.2 °C (-105.2 °F)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) Which of the following is the hottest country on earth by average yearly temperature?
a) Mali
b) Iran
c) Spain
d) Yemen
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) Modern thermometers use mercury or electronic components to record temperatures. What did the first thermometer use instead?
a) Alcohol
b) Water
c) Kerosene
d) Duck fat
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Answers:
1-b (at the then Soviet Vostok Station in Antarctica, 1983), 2-a, 3-b.