URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/imf-looking-reform
Title: 🌍 The IMF is looking to reform

Today’s newsletter supported by:
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Even animals love winning. A horse once
jumped a fence
to lead France’s
Critérium International
bike race for miles. Feeling ambitious, a pony then
gate-crashed
the
Tour of Poland
. And because why not, a cow
had a crack
in last week’s
Tour of San Carlos
in Costa Rica.
Today’s briefing is a 4 min read:
🏦
The
IMF
says it’s ready for change.
🇭🇹
The UN approves a peacekeeping mission to
Haiti
.
➕
Plus:
An embassy on stilts, how the papers are covering the ousting of the US House Speaker, and a crypto king in court.
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇦🇲
Armenia
: Lawmakers have voted in favour of
joining the International Criminal Court
(ICC), in an apparent show of defiance against Armenia’s estranged ally Russia. The ICC has a warrant out for the Russian president’s arrest.
🇭🇺
Hungary
: The EU is reportedly considering unblocking
$13.6B in frozen funds
in exchange for Hungary’s support on a new Ukraine aid package. Brussels originally blocked the funds due to concerns about rule of law erosion in Hungary.
🇮🇳
India
: Delhi has told Canada to
withdraw around 40 diplomats
from India, amid continued fallout over allegations of India’s possible role in the murder of a Canadian citizen. This latest move could cut Canada’s local diplomatic footprint by two thirds.
🇺🇸
US
: The Federal Communications Commission issued its
first fine for space debris
on Monday, accusing a satellite TV company of not properly deorbiting a decades-old satellite. There are over 3,000 dead satellites currently orbiting the Earth.
🇹🇳
Tunisia
: President Kais Saied has
refused a $133M disbursement
from the EU, claiming it wasn’t what the parties had previously agreed. The move throws into question the viability of the EU-Tunisia migration pact signed in July.
🏦
IMF | Development
Is the IMF ready for reform?
The head of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), Kristalina Georgieva, has told the
Financial Times
she would back reforms around IMF voting.
Why?
In theory, IMF members earn
voting power
in the organisation based on their relative share of the global economy, but in practice:
🇺🇸
The US
(15.3% of the global economy) has a 17.4% voting share
🇩🇪
Germany
(3.2% of the global economy) has a 5.6% voting share
🇮🇳
India
(7.47% of the global economy) has a 2.75% vote, and
🇨🇳
China
(18.9% of the global economy) has 6.4% of the votes.
While the IMF is supposed to review these voting shares every five years, the last time its Board of Governors approved new arrangements was in 2010.
And what’s happened since 2010?
India’s economy has more than doubled, while China’s has nearly tripled. And China has moved to carve out its own space in the international financial system by launching a
development bank
(and
other programs
).
Intrigue's take:
If you wanted the IMF to better reflect the modern world, China’s underrepresentation seems a fair enough place to start.
But the US (which has IMF veto power) has
hinted
it’ll block such measures so long as China fails to respect the IMF’s “
roles and norms
”, a veiled reference to
criticism
that China has hampered IMF efforts to ease the debt burden on poor countries.
So maybe a US veto will be the carrot China needs to adjust its approach to the IMF. Or… maybe it’ll be the stick that pushes China further away.
Also worth noting:
The IMF has a December deadline to complete its voting review.
A recent IMF visit to Sri Lanka
reportedly
saw the IMF deny further bailouts until China grants Sri Lanka debt relief. Sri Lanka’s president apparently plans to raise this soon with his Chinese counterpart.
📰
How newspapers covered…
The ousting of the US Speaker of the House
Delhi, India
“Kevin McCarthy becomes first person ever to be outed as US House Speaker, says ‘don’t regret standing up for choosing governance over grievance.’”
Tokyo, Japan
“U.S. House speaker ouster means more chaos as shutdown fight looms”
Sydney, Australia
“Kevin McCarthy dumped as US House Speaker: Could Donald Trump really replace him?”
Today’s newsletter is supported by: iubenda
Get privacy law compliant in minutes with iubenda!
iubenda offers attorney-level software solutions to make websites and apps compliant with GDPR and EU Cookie Law, CCPA, LGPD, and other privacy laws.
iubenda’s software solutions allow creating legal documents like privacy and cooked policies, terms and conditions, displaying cookie notices, managing consent, and handling internal privacy across various countries and in multiple languages.
See how it works!
🇭🇹
Haiti | Defence & security
UN Security Council approves Haiti mission
The UN Security Council (UNSC) has
approved
an initial year-long security mission to Haiti to aid with the country’s entrenched gang problem. Ariel Henry, the acting prime minister who’s been calling for foreign support since last year,
thanked
the UNSC,
adding
“
we couldn't wait any longer
”.
Calling the security situation in Haiti ‘dire’ is an understatement:
Thousands
have been killed
since January
Violent gangs control
most of the capital
Port-au-Prince, and
A key gang leader has even called for an
armed uprising
to overthrow the provisional government
So this multinational and UN-authorised mission, to be led by Kenya, aims to secure key infrastructure while supporting local police in “targeted operations”.
Why’d it take so long?
Partly because the two previous UN peacekeeping missions to Haiti led to a
cholera outbreak
and widespread
abuse
.
Intrigue’s take:
So there are real
questions
around whether Haiti is ready for another foreign intervention; and whether Kenya is best placed to lead it.
But it’s notable that the UN Security Council has managed to push past its record of gridlock and agree on an option at all. And that’ll count as a success for those who see doing nothing as the worst option of all.
Also worth noting:
The UNSC motion passed with 13 votes out of 15.
The two abstentions came from
Russia and China
: Russia said an armed intervention was an extreme measure that needed to be thought through, while China said that without a functional government in place, external support wouldn’t be effective.
➕
Extra Intrigue
What we’re reading about the trial of Sam Bankman-Fried, founder of the collapsed crypto exchange FTX
SBF’s trial starts this week, but how did he — and FTX — get here?
‘Dark’ donations, free love and the fall: the Sam Bankman-Fried trial is here
The FTX trial is bigger than Sam Bankman-Fried
Crypto Could Be a Mystery to Jurors in Bankman-Fried Case
($)
🗳️ Poll time!
Do you think another peacekeeping mission to Haiti is a good idea?
🗡️ Yes, it must be better than doing nothing
🛡️ No, it'll only worsen the situation
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
🏠
Embassy of the day
Ecuador’s embassy in neighbouring Colombia stands out
. Literally. Its office space is elevated on stilts to add to the building’s multi-dimensionality, while its colour palette is a stark contrast to the surrounding brick buildings. And don’t even get us started on all that sweet, sweet, natural light.
Yesterday’s poll:
Which of the following do you think is the best way to build influence abroad?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
💸
Investment  (34%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
🚢
Trade  (34%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 🎖️ Security (9%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️ 🎭 Culture  (20%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!) (3%)
Your two cents
:
💸
J
: “It's tangible for both citizens and leaders.”
🚢
R.C:
“Countries' trade needs are perhaps the only reason the world hasn't yet become a huge graveyard.”
🎖️
L.T
: “A strong military speaks volumes.”
🎭
T.S
: “Religion (as an aspect of culture) is the best way to build influence and alliances abroad.”