URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/the-pope-s-geopolitical-legacy-55074c04342ec895
Title: 🌍 The Pope's geopolitical legacy

Today’s newsletter:
— The pope’s geopolitical legacy
— Our five energy tech predictions
— The world’s lighter news
Supported by
Good morning  {{first_name  | Intriguer}}
. There’ve been plenty of diplomats moonlighting as writers (or vice versa). India’s Vikas Swarup, for instance, was serving in London when he wrote his best-selling novel that became the hit film,
Slumdog Millionaire.
And America’s own Michael Punke was serving as ambassador to the WTO when his novel became the Oscar-winning film,
The Revenant.
There’s also Paraguay’s Esteban Bedoya, who was serving in Canberra when his work shot to global attention. He’d penned a short story about a pope’s resignation — something that hadn’t happened in six centuries, until Pope Benedict suddenly did exactly that in 2013, with some startling parallels to Bedoya’s earlier novella.
Anyway, today’s briefing focuses on the man who succeeded Benedict:
Pope Francis, and his geopolitical legacy
.
Number of the day
4
That’s how many times the Dow has had a single-day 1,000-point drop since this month’s US tariff
Liberation Day
(there’ve only been 11 such days in history)
End of an era
For centuries, popes hardly ventured beyond Rome, with the occasional epic exception like Pius VII, who only left town because Napoleon abducted him! But the jet era — and a 1929 treaty establishing Vatican statehood — changed all that.
Enter Pope Francis.
With a 2013 arrival full of pope-firsts (the first Jesuit, the first from the Americas, and the first born outside Europe in 1,200 years), he was always going to make his mark.
But which of his moves might leave the longest tail? Here are three candidates:
The pope's deal with China
One place a pope still hasn’t visited? China. Mao cut ties after he seized power in 1949. But Pope Francis extended a hand, and even
voiced
broad admiration for China.
And that all culminated in a 2018 deal, still not public, empowering China's Communist Party (rather than the pope) to keep appointing bishops, while leaving the pope with a final veto.
So why's that controversial?
The pope argued
it would help unite China's ~12 million Catholics, long split between Party-controlled churches and those ‘underground’, thus ensuring the faith's survival in China while opening up dialogue he could use to shine a light on the Party's human rights abuses. But... (always a but)
His critics
say he played into Xi's hands, ceding a church right (appointing bishops) while turning a blind eye to the Party's growing crackdown on believers. That's partly why Hong Kong's fiery ex-bishop
dunked
on the deal as naïve, and "
giving the flock into the mouths of the wolves
".
The pope's take on Russia
You might recall the pope last year urged Ukraine to "
have the courage of the white flag
" and enter negotiations with Russia. The Vatican later clarified he was just using the language of the interviewer, but critics saw it in the broader context of…
His line about NATO triggering the war by "
barking at the gates
" of Russia
His reference to Russians and Ukrainians as brothers (a Putin line), and
What his critics argue has been relative silence on Russian crimes in Ukraine.
There’s been endless analysis of whether this all reflects
a)
his consistent calls for peace (as in Gaza and elsewhere),
b)
the pope’s own experiences with the US in his native Latin America,
c)
an attempt to build on his historic 2015 meeting with his Russian counterpart (who's blessed Putin's invasion as a holy war), or even
d)
a shift to align the Vatican's views more closely with the Global South, home to most of the world’s Catholics.
The pope's take on social issues
Given the pope borrowed his name from St Francis of Assisi, there’s no surprise he sought to echo that 12-13th century figure’s focus on issues like poverty. Yet maybe the surprises were in the how, whether through his
spicy letter
on Trump's migration policy, or his publishing of a pope’s first-ever
encyclical
on the environment.
But he still broadly upheld traditional teachings across other issues, which is why one of his biographers memorably summed him up as “
a radical, but not a liberal
”.
Intrigue’s Take
Intriguers will know that any geopolitical take on the pope is legally obliged to mention Stalin's 1953 quote, dismissing French pleas to stop persecuting Catholics due to opposition from the pope: “
The pope! How many divisions has he got?
”
It was a line that went straight to the heart of how Stalin saw power. But of course, it’s incomplete: while historians (and a revivalist Putin) now pick at the carcass of Stalin's soviet system, the Vatican is still there. As for Francis? History might recall him as the first modern pope to inhabit a multipolar world, responding with a focus on cross-border issues, while approaching authoritarians like Xi and Putin with caution.
So what next?
That’s up to the 135 cardinals, who’ll eventually elect a successor.
Whoever it is, they'll enter an even more multipolar world — and our gut is that'll make the pope more powerful, not less. History suggests a more multipolar world will see more instability, opening more space for mediation. But also, in a world with more fearful and withdrawn capitals, cross-border ideas will be more potent. And for citizens grappling with more digital decades ahead, that all might (counterintuitively?) place a premium on more traditional sources of influence and power.
Sound even smarter:
The Vatican is one of 12 states recognising Taiwan, and the only one in Europe.
Among the pope’s various other geopolitical ‘firsts’: he became the first pope to address the US Congress, the first to recognise a State of Palestine, and the first to visit Mongolia, Iraq, South Sudan, and the Arabian Peninsula.
🙏
Share this story!
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
Mode Mobile.
As Elon Musk puts it,
“Apple used to really bring out products that would blow people’s minds.” Those days are long gone, and a new smartphone company is stepping up to deliver the mind-blowing moments we've been missing. They’ve just been granted the stock ticker $MODE by the Nasdaq, and you can still make an investment in their pre-IPO offering.
Turning smartphones from an expense into an income stream, Mode has already helped users earn and save an eye-popping $325M+ and seen an astonishing 32,481% revenue growth rate over three years. Uber did it to taxis, Airbnb did it to hotels…And now, Mode Mobile is doing it to the $500 billion smartphone industry.
Don’t miss your chance to invest in the next big disruption to smartphones.
⏰
Time is running out to invest at $0.26/share - price changes next week.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇺🇸
NEW YORK — Stocks fall after Trump renews attacks on Fed chair.
US markets shed another $1.5T on Monday after Donald Trump called the Fed’s Jerome Powell a “
major loser
” for declining to cut rates (the Fed’s wary of inflation). Against that backdrop, gold hit a record $3,500. (
The Guardian
)
Comment:
There aren’t many sacred things on Wall St, but central bank independence is one of them.
🇷🇺
MOSCOW — Putin proposes direct talks after violating Easter truce.
It’s the first time since his full-scale invasion of Ukraine that the Russian president has signalled openness to direct talks with Kyiv, and it comes after Trump suggested he’d walk away if there’s no progress on negotiations.
(
BBC
)
Comment:
It’s been 42 days since Ukraine accepted, but Putin dismissed, Trump’s proposed 30-day ceasefire. Putin’s latest reference to direct talks with Ukraine feels like another attempt to string things along while his attacks continue.
🇵🇪
LIMA — Peru to open global defence fair, Russians eye a deal.
Peru is hosting a big air show (SITDEF 2025) this upcoming weekend, and one of the many arms-makers there will be Russia’s state-owned Rosoboronexport.
(
MSN
)
Comment:
We were intrigued to see the Russian firm make promises of a regional service centre in Peru. As well as a show of reach, it’s an attempt to counter one of the criticisms of Russian kit (hard to service).
🇹🇳
TUNIS — Tunisian court jails opposition leaders on conspiracy charges.
The sentences range from 13 to 66 years — the biggest went to a prominent business leader who (like the others) rejects the charges as fabricated. President Said has ruled by decree since 2021 and now controls the courts.
(
France 24
)
Comment:
You might recall the Arab Spring began in Tunisia when mass protests ousted their long-time dictator. But after winning a landslide election as an outsider in 2019, Said now induces a gloomy deja vu for many Tunisians.
🇧🇩
DHAKA — India, Bangladesh mini trade war continues.
Delhi and Dhaka have found themselves in a mini trade war lately, after Bangladesh blocked Indian yarn imports at select ports (citing complaints of unfair competition). India retaliated by denying trans-shipment facility access for its export-dependent neighbour.
(
The Straits Times
)
Comment:
As the global trading system comes under more strain, there’ll be more side deals where possible, but more side trade-wars, too.
🇩🇪
BERLIN
— Merz vows to make Germany “
economically stronger
”.
Germany’s chancellor-in-waiting Friedrich Merz has pledged to use new investments and tax cuts to make Germany “
economically stronger, safer, fairer and more modern.
” He’s also pledged a more active Germany on the world stage, "
not loudly, but reliably — not arrogantly, but in partnership.
" (
DW
)
Comment:
He’s sounding more confident as he approaches his May 6 swearing-in (yes, his last line above is being widely interpreted as a diss at President Trump).
🇨🇳
BEIJING — China, GCC hold first forum on peaceful nuclear cooperation.
China and the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) have held talks on the
“Peaceful Use of Nuclear Technology”
, while Iran’s foreign minister just withdrew from a nuclear conference at DC’s Carnegie Endowment, over a dispute on whether he’d take questions after his virtual address.
(
Newsweek
)
Comment:
Nuclear powers use access to nuclear tech as a carrot, but this story is reminder how it can work both ways: the Saudis have long listed US nuclear tech as the price to recognise Israel, and signing a nuclear MOU with China (as the Saudis just did) is a simple way to tap the sign again.
🇺🇸
WASHINGTON DC — Is Hegseth on his way out?
Following the NYT’s
reporting
($) on allegations he popped classified details into yet another unclassified Signal chat, NPR is now reporting that the White House is weighing up replacing the US defence secretary. The White House has denied the reports, calling them fake news
. (
NPR
)
Comment:
We’ve crunched the numbers and can confirm that Hegseth just reached eight Scaramuccis (each measured as 11 days on the job).
From our sponsors
The Secret to a Stress-Free Vacation
Want to know the difference between an okay trip and an unforgettable one? It’s simple: speak the language.
With Babbel, you’ll be bargaining at markets, making friends, and finding the best local spots—all without awkward hand gestures or Google Translate. And with lessons designed by real language experts, you’ll start speaking in just three weeks.
Save 55% Today
.
Extra Intrigue
🤣
The world’s lighter news
Tourists in London hoping to glimpse famous Beatles sites are reportedly bummed to see
Abbey Road is ‘just a road’
.
Fyre Festival 2.0 organisers are now
postponing the infamous soiree’s sequel
, promising refunds and a new date.
A Swiss court is set to decide whether
pig racing
is a sport.
Researchers have found that
anti-anxiety medicine ending up in streams
has helped local salmon have a better shot at reaching their destination.
And a policeman in India has
misread court documents
, attempting to serve a court summons on his own judge rather than the suspect.
Report of the day
These days, it’s hard to know what’s coming tomorrow let alone next year. But we like to peer into the future anyway, which is why we’ve partnered with Sightline Climate in
honour of Earth Day
(today) to explore the future of
EV batteries
,
nuclear
, and
rare earths
.
For what it’s Earth (sorry), we think you’ll enjoy it.
Get it direct to your inbox here!
Your two cents
What do you think will be the main geopolitical legacy of Pope Francis?
☮️ His calls for peace
🏚️ His focus on poverty
🏞️ His work on the environment
🇨🇳 His deal with China
✍️ Other (write us!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Last Thursday’s poll: Do you think the US will leave the WTO?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
✅
Yep, it's broken, so why stick around (55%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️
❌
Nope, it's better than nothing (43%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!) (2%)
Your two cents:
✅
K.P.M:
“Most of these international organizations, like NATO and the UN, are irreparably broken and completely useless.”
❌
R.J.S:
“Eventually, the Trump administration will quietly understand the damage of their approach and mitigate continued legacy destruction.”
✍️
S.B:
“Yes, only to re-join again with the next administration.”
Disclosure: Mode Mobile recently received their ticker reservation with Nasdaq ($MODE), indicating an intent to IPO in the next 24 months. An intent to IPO is no guarantee that an actual IPO will occur.
The Deloitte rankings are based on submitted applications and public company database research, with winners selected based on their fiscal-year revenue growth percentage over a three-year period.