URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/the-geopolitics-of-epstein-e23181a523ddbc22
Title: 🌍 The geopolitics of Epstein

Today’s briefing:
— The geopolitics of Epstein
— Work in Brussels or Brazil
— Math nerds, unite!
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. We’ve all had that feeling when
maybe
someone doesn’t like us. Jenny from accounts giving you that look again? Barry from HR not answering your ping on Teams?
But when it’s 110,000 people from 100 countries filling out a survey to confirm that, yep, on balance, they’re really not fans? Ufff, that’s rough. And that’s what the 2025 Democracy Perception Index reveals about the US, in a marked drop from last year.
Of course, geopolitics is more than a popularity contest, and even a popularity contest has multiple drivers. But the
Epstein saga
(our lead for today) can’t have helped.
Number of the day
1%
That’s the discount Philippine leader Ferdinand Marcos Jr. managed to shave off President Trump’s 20%
Liberation Day
tariffs, announcing a new deal featuring US tariffs of… 19%.
The Epstein files
We didn’t leave the foreign service to write about Jeffrey Epstein, but the convicted predator is still dominating discourse from beyond the grave. So it’s time we took a quick look at how this issue is now rippling around the world
But first, a non-exhaustive-but-still-exhaust
ing
recap of the latest:
The justice department
claims
it’s not found any “
incriminating
‘client list
’”,
and plans no further releases. Together with the FBI, it’s also shared “
unedited
” prison CCTV around Epstein’s death that… it turns out was a bit edited.
This has angered the
president’s base
, given he campaigned on releasing it all.
After variously rejecting cover-up claims and blaming opponents for anything out there, the president directed his attorney-general to release grand jury testimony.
Then yesterday (Tuesday), Speaker Mike Johnson adjourned the House early for summer to avoid a vote on releasing all Epstein files, describing the motion as "
a political battering ram
".
So why’s this now appearing in your favourite geopolitics briefing?
Five reasons
:
🇺🇸
USA
No matter which
Veep
season you’re up to, DC is still the world’s power capital. By far. And both its major parties have an Epstein problem, given both Presidents Trump and Clinton appear in Epstein’s private jet flight logs, for example.
They’ve since distanced themselves and continue to deny any wrongdoing, but it’s now Trump in power facing the continued drip-drip of allegations, meaning three things:
Polls suggest American
voters
are unhappy with how he’s handling this
Prominent members of his
base
are unhappy with how he’s handling this, and
Erstwhile friends in the
media
aren’t afraid to go public with
new claims
.
So foreign embassies will be exploring how this might
a
) distract the president and his administration,
b
) shape next year’s mid-terms, and
c
) loosen Trump’s grip on power.
And you can bet that’ll all factor into the strategies employed by US rivals, such as…
🇷🇺
Russia
State-owned outlet Russia Today isn’t wasting any time: it posted about this sordid saga
eight
times
in 19 hours on Tuesday, and had a similar focus the prior week when Trump announced a possible pivot to support Ukraine’s self-defence.
Why?
Separate to any legitimate public interest above, the Kremlin is a master at using public discourse to sow discord, disunity, distrust, and destabilisation among rivals. And Epstein is ideal for that because it’s:
a
) a real story,
b
) home-grown,
c
) already raging, and
d
) plays naturally to the kinds of
populist
, anti-establishment narratives Moscow loves abroad (if not at home): a cabal of elites running the world and evading accountability.
Just fanning the story is enough to push more voters towards the fringe, while pitting the Dems against MAGA, MAGA against itself, citizens against elites, and the little guy against a deep state. It also helps the Kremlin
undermine the credibility
of any White House decision it doesn’t like: oh, helping Ukraine defend itself? Just a distraction from Epstein.
But rivals do more than just amplify this story. They also embellish it, like its link to…
🇮🇱
Israel
Epstein invested in Israeli start-ups and repeatedly met ex-PM Ehud Barak long after US courts had convicted the disgraced American.
And that’s been enough fodder for theories that Epstein was secretly working for
Israel’s foreign intelligence service
, Mossad. Some of that theory’s biggest proponents still get platformed on Russia’s state-owned
Sputnik
, continuing Moscow’s
long history
of
leveraging
divisive themes like anti-Semitism to erode Western unity.
And it’s all been enough to prompt a recent
statement
by another former Israeli PM, Naftali Bennett, condemning “
a vicious wave of slander and lies against my country
”.
Meanwhile, it’s also a reminder of Epstein’s ability to build elite networks, even in…
🇸🇦
Saudi Arabia
During Epstein’s 2019 trial, prosecutors presented
a fake Austrian passport
listing a Saudi address, and featuring (among other things) Saudi entry stamps dating back to the ‘80s. His infamous ‘
black book
’ of contacts also contained listings for Saudi royals, and Epstein himself boasted of close ties to the kingdom’s crown prince (MBS) in 2018.
Of course, there’s no suggestion of wrongdoing here, but it’s yet another foreign capital engulfed in the never-ending Epstein saga. The Saudis still haven’t commented, unlike…
🇬🇧
British ambassador to the US, Peter Mandelson
His classically British, stoic, diplomatic
statement
on all this? “
F*ck off
”.
That’s what he recently told FT journalists asking about his Epstein links, which resurfaced via an
internal JPMorgan report
describing Epstein’s “
particularly close
” ties not just with the disgraced Prince Andrew, but Britain’s own political operator and now top envoy in DC, Lord Peter Mandelson: “
I regret ever meeting him or being introduced to him by his partner Ghislaine Maxwell. I regret even more the hurt he caused to many young women.
”
And maybe we should leave it there.
Intrigue’s Take
It’s such a sordid story, but hopefully you can see from the above glimpse why an Intrigue update was inevitable: royals, presidents, plutocrats, and even diplomats are getting burnt.
So what might we learn from all this?
Power
has a natural network effect: access begets access, which begets impunity. Whatever (and wherever) the issue, you’re eventually a call away from a solution.
Populism
is potent but unpredictable: it can engulf its own champions if they cross the wrong line, less on the left-right axis, and more elites-vs-the people.
Sunlight
is the answer: whether it’s despotic elites like Putin or the destabilising potential of populism, they leverage darkness, doubt, and deflection, all enabled here by systematic failures to hold Epstein to account decades ago.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇯🇵
JAPAN
-
We’ll trade ya.
After weeks of talks, President Trump has announced another trade deal, dropping his 24%
Liberation Day
tariffs on Japan to a flat 15% rate. That 15% will give Japan’s auto sector an edge over others still facing 25% tariffs. In return, Japan is promising to invest $550B in the US, plus more market access for US agriculture. (
CNN
)
Comment:
It comes just days after voters rebuked PM Shigeru Ishiba at the ballot box, in part over concerns about the economy. We can only wonder if that defeat at home made Ishiba more open to compromise abroad, in hopes of a quick win.
🇺🇦
UKRAINE
-
Don’t do it!
President Zelensky has signed into law a controversial provision stripping the national anti-corruption bureau of its independence, citing “
Russian influence
”. The move is facing widespread domestic opposition given ongoing criticism around his concentration of power. (
Guardian
)
Comment:
US and EU officials have also expressed concerns, and the timing is miserable — right as Kyiv needs every ounce of Western solidarity in the face of Russian aggression.
🇵🇰
PAKISTAN
-
Canned.
An anti-terrorism court has jailed eight senior members of former leader Imran Khan’s party for inciting riots against military sites after his 2023 arrest. (
Independent
)
🇹🇷
TURKEY
-
Splish
s
plash!
Turkey has accused Greece of exploiting universal issues like the environment to expand its own territory, after Athens unveiled the boundaries of what it’s calling the biggest marine sanctuaries in the Mediterranean. It’s all just public consultation at this stage, but Ankara is vowing to announce its own marine parks. (
EuroNews
)
🇦🇺
AUSTRALIA
-
Bloomin’ hell.
A toxic algae is in full bloom Down Under, forcing various seafood businesses to shut down and putting export income at risk. There’s now debate on whether to declare the (naturally occurring) phenomenon a national disaster. (
ABC
)
🇵🇷
PUERTO RICO
-
Turn the lights on.
Authorities have sued power company Luma for negligence, holding it responsible for household appliances damaged by persistent outages across the island. (
AP
)
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
Nuclear hackers.
Microsoft says at least three China-based groups have exploited a vulnerability to hack into more than 100 servers globally, targeting institutions like the US National Nuclear Security Administration, the Department of Education, and governments from Europe to the Middle East. (
Bloomberg
$)
Extra Intrigue
The Intrigue jobs board
💼
Tech Risk and Controls Lead
@
JPMorganChase
in Shanghai
Public Affairs Officer (Temp)
@
European Automobile Manufacturers Association
in Brussels
Program Manager Policy, LATAM
@
Airbnb
in São Paulo or Mexico City
And some
extra DC opportunities
for any Intriguers caught up in the State layoffs:
Associate Fellow
@
Center for a New American Security
International Affairs Action Officer
@
Booz Allen Hamilton
Program Officer, Tech Policy Program
@
CEPA
Director, Donor Engagement @
Center for Disaster
Philanthropy
Competition of the day
Math nerds, unite!
The International Mathematical Olympiad took place on Australia’s Sunshine Coast over the weekend, helicopter parents and all. The dominant powers of China, the US, and Korea again crushed it, coming first, second, and third respectively.
But you know what? There were also two AI competitors in the mix:
Google and OpenAI.
And while both bots reached gold-level scores, neither machine scored full marks (unlike five of the young humans present). Still, they’re improving rapidly. Last year, Google’s AI took two or three days to eke out a silver. This year? Just hours for a gold.
Today’s poll
Has the Epstein saga impacted your trust in public institutions?
🎯 Yes, here's why...
🤷 No, here's why...
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
What do you think should take priority in the Motuo dam project?
⚡ China's energy transition (18%)
👥
Local Tibetan wishes (43%)
🌊
The concerns of neighbours (35%)
✍️ Other (write us!) (3%)
Your two cents:
⚡  B.S:
“China’s energy sector is one of the dirtiest, most carbon intensive industries globally. This is exactly the type of swing-for-the-fences move every nation needs to be making, China most of all.”
👥
L.C:
“Demoralizing the religious people in Tibet by flooding a valley containing ancient temples is disgusting. Further proof that greed for power is destroying our world!”
🌊
E.K.H:
“This could turn off the tap for a population bigger than the entire US. Even without an explicit threat, the knowledge that they could would be enough to force their neighbors into just about any concessions.”
✍️ G.C:
“I don't think there should be a priority. Everything needs to be considered. People, their homes and culture, water for everyone. No one country should control the water for many.”