URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/reduced-size-template-e3b7f0188f52e26e
Title: 🌍 The US shutdown and the world

Today’s briefing:
— The US shutdown and the world
— 4 countries just ditched their borders
— Win a trip to Japan
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Many global cities have a diplomatic spouses club. They host social events and raise a bit of cash for local charity — it’s a good way to help embassy families connect with each other, and with the local community.
But as with any club, big egos will occasionally make it more about, well, their big egos!
True story: there was once some kind of personal rivalry brewing in a local diplomatic spouse club, until one of the members tragically lost their diplomat partner in a car crash.
Egos in the spouse club initially hit pause on the pettiness for maybe a week to let this particular spouse grieve. But soon enough, and I kid you not, one of them eventually reached out and explained that, as this berieved person was no longer
technically
a diplomatic spouse, they were no longer allowed in the diplomatic spouse club!
Anyway, that’s the level of disfunction on my mind as we explore
the global impacts of America’s latest shutdown
.
Treaty of the day
Pukpuk
That’s the name (meaning ‘crocodile’) of the mutual defence pact Papua New Guinea’s cabinet just agreed to sign with neighbouring Australia. PNG
unexpectedly postponed
the treaty last month, amid escalating Western competition with China for regional influence.
The stall on Capitol Hill
Intrigue’s dispatch is coming to you this morning from inside a US base in Germany (opportune time to see friends abroad). Surrounded by the Alps, Washington feels a world away, yet all the local chatter has still been about the first US government shutdown in more than six years.
Between jokes that the US now has a ‘volunteer’ military (troops still show up but risk missing a paycheck), and assurances the commissary is still in fact open, our big question remains —
should folks outside the US care about another shutdown?
Let’s answer that by timeframe, shall we? Most shutdowns have only lasted…
🤏
Just a few days
If we see a repeat of that, the international impact might be pretty limited…
Embassies and consulates
remain open.
Diplomats keep working, but stuff deemed non-essential gets paused (think cultural events and official LinkedIn updates — we definitely endorse declaring LinkedIn non-essential btw).
Most immigration services
run on a fee-based structure with support from the above diplomats, with as little as 1% of
US Citizenship and Immigration Services
workers hit by shutdown furloughs. So any impacts here
should
be limited.
The markets
don’t seem to be too bothered either, instead hitting fresh records, while Treasury’s
Office of Foreign Assets Control
is still beavering away delivering
new hits
on Iran’s weapons procurement channels.
Oh, and if you have a banger trip booked to Vegas,
TSA
will still be there kindly instructing you to take that MacBook (with Intrigue stickers) out at security.
So, if this whole drama gets cleared up in a few days? Folks from Tokyo to Tunis can safely tune it right the heck out
.
But if it drags on for…
📅
A full week?
Paychecks
start to go missing for those government workers above, and you’d be amazed how much productivity can drop when landlords come a-knocking.
Customs workers
, now processing ~$100M in tariffs a day, will mostly continue unaffected, meaning key trade lanes and terminals keep operating. But back-office furloughs might start to slow down some documentation and compliance.
Tourists
can still visit most national parks, but international numbers typically drop as pics of unattended trash-piles and restrooms go viral.
And
immigration
services can start to feel the heat, though more via back-end functions like court hearings rather than front-facing services or enforcement.
So, as this thing drags through the first week, the impacts gradually start to accumulate, until you get yourself…
🗓️
A prolonged shutdown
Three of the last four shutdowns (1995-96, 2013, 2018-19) have lasted weeks. The last one (2018-19) lasted
five
. If we see something like that again, you can expect…
Markets
will get the jitters, eying US treasury bonds for any offloading — that could reflect foreign governments questioning America’s safe-haven appeal, with (historically short-term) ripples onto reserves and rates. That’ll be exacerbated by…
Economic data delays
, as key data agencies are typically not classified as essential (even the SEC halts registrations). That means markets will start to fly blind amid a backlog of inflation, growth, retail, housing, and jobs reports. And…
Of course,
allies will start to feel it
, whether it’s delays in defence export approvals or the powerful
Committee on Foreign Investment in the US
, or just a sense key US players in tariff talks are too busy yelling about the shutdown.
And let’s not forget those
foreign foes
, who are already milking this for public confirmation that the US is a declining power beset by chaos and conflict.
So those jokes on American bases abroad will probably start sounding a whole lot less funny the longer this saga drags on.
Intrigue’s Take
You could look at all the past shutdowns, or the chaos around Covid, and conclude that things all tend to stabilise sooner or later. The US is resilient.
But that depends on whether this time is different. And there are reasons it might be:
Polling all points to more
polarisation
, raising the prospects of a longer shutdown
President Trump is warning of more
hard-ball tactics
like permanent layoffs
Markets are now more
data-dependant
given all the international uncertainty
And this is all playing out against
weaker US credit
(Moody’s downgrade), plus…
There are now
more wars
around the world than last time.
Either way, the longer this drags on, the longer the rest of the world wonders what a divided and gridlocked America can still do for (or against) it.
Sound even smarter:
The main disagreement on the Hill is around healthcare spending.
Secretary of State Marco Rubio
argues
it’s
“jeopardizing our national security.”
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇺🇦
UKRAINE
-
Strike
.
The Wall Street Journal is reporting the US will, in a first, start providing Ukraine with intelligence for long-range strikes on Russia’s energy structure. The US is also weighing deliveries of Tomahawks, Barracudas, and other US missiles. (
The WSJ
)
Comment:
The Kremlin will inevitably warn of consequences if the US supplies these arms, though Putin’s consequences will probably just look the same as when Ukraine got Western systems like ATACMS, Himars, Storm Shadow, and Scalp: ie, he’s bluffing.
🇨🇴
COLOMBIA
-
Be gone
.
President Petro has had another busy day on the foreign front, expelling Israel’s last remaining diplomats in protest at the interception of a
flotilla of activists
headed for Gaza. He’s also in a spat with his own foreign ministry after flagging he’ll replace all “
feudal
” career ambassadors with loyalists. (
MercoPress
)
Comment:
Petro is facing several scandals back home, including not just a deteriorating security situation, but also an eldest son now facing even more corruption charges at an indictment hearing due within days.
🇪🇺
EUROPEAN UNION
-
Drone on.
European leaders in Denmark have failed to agree on a new ‘drone wall’ to protect Europe’s eastern and northern flanks from Russian drone incursions. Europe’s four biggest economies (Germany, France, Italy, Spain) are the ones managing expectations, while Eastern and Baltic states are full steam ahead. (
Euractiv
)
Comment:
This is partly the point of Putin’s hybrid warfare: send a few drones, then watch the West squabble over any response, while border nations fret over allied reliability. It also distracts Europe from Putin’s own mounting woes (Russian analysts now assess 38% of its refining capacity is now offline, mostly due to Ukrainian hits).
🇵🇭
PHILIPPINES
-
Deadly quake.
A 6.9 earthquake in central Philippines has left some 70 or more people dead, just weeks after the country was battered by two back-to-back typhoons. (
Philstar
)
🇰🇷
SOUTH KOREA
-
Makin’ it rain.
President Lee has used his Armed Forces Day address to announce that South Korea will boost its military spending by 8.2% next year. Amid US pressure on allies to spend more, Lee said “
the momentum for cooperation and shared prosperity is weakening across the world, and we are entering an era of increased conflict, where it’s every man for himself.
” (
MSN
)
Comment:
Lee’s diagnosis is spot on.
🇦🇫
AFGHANISTAN
-
Reconnected.
Parts of Afghanistan are now regaining their internet and telecom connections after two days of complete blackout that hit banking, travel, and aid. The ruling Taliban hasn’t offered an explanation, though the group has been intentionally severing cables to cut down on “
vice
” lately. (
France24
)
🇧🇧
BARBADOS
-
No borders.
Four
Caribbean countries (Barbados, Belize, Dominica, and St Vincent & the Grenadines) have finalised an EU-style free movement pact after years of talks. They’re hoping it’ll not just help with economic integration, but also stem the brain-drain of highly-skilled folks leaving for the US, UK, and Canada. (
Guardian
)
Comment:
It’s an interesting counterpoint to immigration debates playing out elsewhere, which have tended to lean away from integration lately. The relevant Barbados ambassador is crediting the neighbours’ cultural similarities for their willingness to open up further.
Extra Intrigue
Meanwhile, in other worlds…
Art
: Italian authorities have confiscated 21 artworks from a Salvador Dali exhibition on suspicion that
the paintings are fakes
.
History
: Over 200 historical artefacts dating back hundreds of years have been
found in a vulture nesting site in Spain
.
Science
: The legendary Jane Goodall, the
world’s foremost expert on chimpanzees
, has passed away in Los Angeles, aged 91.
Diplomacy of the day
Shout out to Japan’s embassy in Delhi
, which just launched its second-ever ‘CLICK!’ photo contest. The rules are simple: you must be an Indian national, and you must’ve snapped your pic in Japan between 1 March 2025 and 15 February 2026. Three lucky winners will then score some sweet sweet prizes from Japan’s Canon and JAL carrier.
The strategy is geeky, but it kills a few embassy birds with one stone, by…
Incentivising travel to Japan
Fostering more embassy links with folks in India, and
Avoiding another boring institutional event.
Speaking of non-boring events, shoot us an email if you’d like to partner with Intrigue on a tailor-made event for your company or organisation!
Today’s poll
How long do you think this US government shutdown will last?
⊖ Under one week
✚ A week or so
2️⃣ Two weeks
🗓️ Longer
✍️ Other (write us!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think social media has helped make politics more democratic?
🗣️ Yes, everyone gets a voice (24%)
📢
No, it's amplifying anti-democratic forces (70%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (6%)
Your two cents:
📢
K.L.C:
“Social media algorithms, controlled by companies, are also (very obviously) being manipulated.”
✍️
T:
“The good news is everyone gets a voice... The bad news is everyone gets a voice.”
🗣️
F.G:
“It's really hard to get away with stuff when all the world is watching all the time.”
✍️
L.M:
“Both, it's allowing more people to be heard than ever before at the same time that it is providing the tools for the media companies and governments to decide which messages get amplified.”