URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/the-india-pakistan-spat-four-scenarios-7fad3b5129517756
Title: 🌍 The India-Pakistan spat: four scenarios

Today’s briefing:
— India and Pakistan still at it
— David Attenborough’s 99th birthday surprise
— Weak bloc, cool flag
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Few thinkers have shaped the reality for diplomats like Joseph Nye, the Harvard professor famous for the concept of ‘soft power’ — a nation’s ability to shape the world through cultural and ideological appeal.
Yes, the stuff behind the embassy gate is important, but you’ve gotta find ways to connect it all with the folks outside.
I mention this because Professor Nye has passed away, aged 88. A remarkable innings.
Now, let’s get you the latest on this
India vs Pakistan showdown
.
Number of the day
133
That’s how many cardinals are now locked in the Sistine Chapel to elect a new pope. It should’ve been 135 (the total number of cardinals aged under 80), but two called in sick. Yesterday’s first vote ended with black smoke (no pope).
Where next for India and Pakistan?
After two weeks of warnings, India unveiled its
Operation Sindoor
yesterday
, featuring
nine
“
precision strikes
”
across Kashmir’s line of control (LoC) into Pakistan-administered turf. It was the long-expected response to last month’s terrorist attack targeting Hindu tourists in Indian-controlled Kashmir, leaving 28 dead from India, Nepal, and the UAE.
A Pakistan-based jihadi group claimed responsibility but then,
mysteriously
, retracted the claim, alleging it was all a hack by Indian intelligence, while…
India has long argued Pakistani intelligence backs these groups, so the
retraction
could’ve
been due to Islamabad’s pressure, or even local Kashmiri outrage.
Anyway, neither side is blinking, with Pakistan vowing its own retaliation to the retaliation.
That’s what you call
a classic escalation ladder
, with domestic political pressure pushing both governments higher and higher. So, what happens next? Here are four scenarios —
Flexing over?
Delhi says it never entered Pakistan’s airspace, and limited its strikes to terrorist infrastructure. For its part, Islamabad has condemned the strikes as an act of war and has claimed hits back against Indian jets (at least three of which we know have “
crashed
”).
So
maybe
that’s enough for both sides to
take a win and step away
— Pakistan has even pledged not to take
“irresponsible action”
if India taps the brakes. Then the uneasy
status quo ante
could resume: diplomatic frost, border incidents, edgy statements, and so on.
But there’s still unquenched outrage on both sides of the border fuelled by history, politics, competition, and faith (last month’s attackers checked ID cards to target Hindus).
Tit-for-tat
If Pakistan’s hawks get their way, they might feel the need for a ‘
quid pro quo plus
’ — a punitive retaliation to re-establish deterrence abroad and legitimacy at home.
In this version, the tit-for-tat continues until each side feels it can declare victory. This stops short of full war, though is still enough to rattle markets, divert flights, take lives, and invite a growing chorus of calls from foreign capitals to
just cool it
.
But in the meantime, the risk of
miscalculation
lingers: that fighter jet turns out to be a passenger jet; that terrorist base turns out to be a holy site; that test fire gets mistaken for the real thing. All real-world examples, and all posing real-world risks of something bigger.
3. New playing field
These two foes might also reach for non-military ways to inflict pain, like India’s move to suspend the 1960 Indus Waters Treaty (providing 90% the water for Pakistan’s crops).
India doesn’t yet have the infrastructure to divert these rivers — and that’s assuming it’d want the optics of starving 240 million neighbours — so it’s a
rhetorical flex
for now.
But it hints at the many non-military (but still escalatory) ways these nuclear powers might try to raise costs on the other. And ultimately, that escalation ladder leads to…
4. The nukes come out
But we leave this one last, and with reason. Aside from the obvious that it’s the worst case scenario, it’s also the least likely.
Still, India and Pakistan have been here before and in each instance, word has eventually leaked that planners considered nuclear scenarios. Yet also in each instance, a varying mix of US mediation, local restraint, and targeted concessions has helped de-escalate things.
But this isn’t 1999 or even 2019 — the US is spread thin, and so is India-Pakistan patience.
Intrigue’s Take
The other dynamic here is how global players calculate their next move — each flare-up in today’s multipolar world becomes an opportunity to out-manoeuvre your rival. China backs Pakistan, Russia has traditionally armed India, and the US is trying to muscle in to nudge Indian power towards curbing Beijing, which in turn sees closer Moscow ties as a way to help keep Delhi in check. This is a tough neighbourhood.
As for what the Kashmiris themselves want? The last time we saw anything close to credible polling (2009-10), a plurality of folks (~44%) actually just wanted independence.
Sound even smarter:
As this hits your inbox, there are reports India just conducted additional strikes targeting Pakistani air defence radars. Looks like the tit-for-tat continues.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
Growthschool
Learn Million Dollar AI Strategies & Tools in this 3 hour AI Workshop.
Growthschool is bringing this special offer for a ChatGTP & AI Workshop to our readers. It is usually $199, but free for our loyal readers.
🎁
This workshop has been taken by
1 Million people
across the globe, who have been able to:
Build business that make $10,000 by just using AI tools
Make quick & smarter decisions using AI-led data insights
Write emails, content & more in seconds using AI
Solve complex problems, research 10x faster & save 16 hours every week
You’ll wish you knew about this FREE AI Training sooner (Btw, it’s rated at 9.8/10 ⭐)
Save your seat for $0 now! (Valid for 24 hours for 100 people only)
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇷🇺
RUSSIA
-
World leaders arrive for WWII parade.
China’s Xi and Brazil’s Lula have now arrived for Friday’s
Victory Day
parade in Moscow, amid heavy exchanges of fire between Russia and Ukraine. (
CNN
)
Comment:
What most of us know as WWII, Russia calls the Great Patriotic War. And while we list 1939 as the start date, Russia goes with 1941. It helps everyone avoid mentioning Moscow’s 1939 pact with the Nazis to invade and divide Poland.
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
Central bank cuts rates
The People’s Bank has cut a benchmark rate (the 7-day reverse repo) by another 10 basis points, and trimmed bank reserve ratios to unleash another trillion yuan (~$140B) of liquidity, as US tariffs start to bite. (
CNBC
)
🇬🇧
UNITED KINGDOM
-
Possible US-UK trade deal today?
The US president has hinted he’ll unveil a trade deal today with “
a big, and highly respected, country
” after his
Liberation Day
tariffs (word is it’s the UK). (
BBC
)
🇫🇷
FRANCE
-
Berlin and Paris set up joint security council.
Germany’s Friedrich Merz made the announcement with Emmanuel Macron in Paris to address their “
common strategic challenges
”. (
Euronews
)
Comment
: With an aggressive Russia in the east and a disengaging US ally to the west, Europe’s own ‘dual motor’ is still trying to get back in gear.
🇾🇪
YEMEN
-
The Houthis and the US reach ceasefire.
President Trump’s pause is reportedly in return for the Iran-backed Houthis stopping attacks
on US ships only
— word is US allies like Israel are astonished. (
DW
)
🇸🇬
SINGAPORE
-
EU and Singapore sign digital trade agreement.
The deal aims to simplify rules for cross-border transactions online. (
Strait Times
)
Comment
: They’ve been in talks since 2023, but it’s fair to assume the arrival of Trump 2.0 will have nudged the EU to diversify its trade ties asap.
🇵🇪
PERU
-
Lima suspends gold mining amid violence.
The 30-day suspension in Peru’s northern Pataz province comes as a mix of record gold prices and political instability fuel a surge in illegal mining. (
Guardian
)
Extra Intrigue
In other worlds…
Tech
: Apple has announced it’ll
add AI features to its Safari browser
as it hustles to close the search gap with Google.
Cinema
: British environmentalist Sir David Attenborough just celebrated his 99th birthday by dropping a
new film about our oceans
.
Business
: China’s lead EV-maker BYD has
backed out of a joint deal
to build a lithium cathode plant in Chile (Santiago blames low lithium prices).
Perks with Intrigue!
Want to win one of 24 signed copies of
In Praise of Idleness
?
It’s the acclaimed take on Bertrand Russell’s legendary essay, from international best-selling humourist and fellow Intriguer, Bradley Trevor Greive AM. Simply refer Intrigue to a couple of friends or frolleagues this month using your unique link below, and you’ll go in the draw!
Flag of the day
While Myanmar’s civil war and China’s vast South China Sea claims test ASEAN’s prestige (folks query the regional bloc’s effectiveness), at least the ASEAN flag rocks.
Adopted back in 1997, the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
banner features 10 rice stalks (one for each member) all bound together in unity, within a
red
(courage and dynamism) and
white
(purity) circle atop a royal blue (peace and stability) background.
I
ntrigue’s rating:
9.8/10
Today’s poll
Which long-term trend makes you optimistic for our future?
🩺 Medical breakthroughs
🌳 Renewable energy growth
💻 Technological advancements
💸 Declining global poverty
✏️ Improving global literacy
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think India and Pakistan are barrelling towards an all out war?
💥
Yes, it's already begun (43%)
🛡️ No, both sides know the stakes (55%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (2%)
Your two cents:
🛡️J.G:
“Pakistan and India have been openly announcing retaliatory strikes. That’s a positive sign.”
💥
E.K.H:
“Who's trying to stop it? Are they as loud and influential as the ones pushing it forward?”
✍️
R.C.O:
“Both sides know the stakes, but domestic political considerations will make a de-escalation difficult.”