URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/the-4-spiciest-themes-at-unga-2025
Title: 🌍 The 4 spiciest themes at UNGA 2025

Today’s briefing:
— The 4 spiciest themes at UNGA 2025
— This world leader has his own beer
— And Moldova’s big winner is…
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. A dear friend once lined up the perfect marriage proposal for his girlfriend in Oxford: the sun was shining, the birds were tweeting, and
just
as he got down on one knee to declare his eternal love, a jolly young boy burst into the clearing, pointing breathlessly at the nearby river and yelling “
look sir, a beaver!!!
”
That’s on my mind (she said yes btw) as we reflect on the
big UN week
now wrapping in New York, where each new priority has seemed breathlessly interrupted by the next.
Deadline of the day
This Wed, October 1st
That’s when the US government is set to start shutting down unless Congress can reach a funding agreement beforehand — federal agencies are already making preparations.
Low resolution
For an organisation at the very heart of international diplomacy, the UN makes precious few cameos in Hollywood. So to right that wrong (and spice things up), today’s wrap-up of
this year’s UN General Assembly
(UNGA) in New York features five quotes from the first feature film ever shot inside UN HQ, Nicole Kidman’s
The Interpreter (2005).
“The gunfire around us makes it hard to hear” —
Russia-Ukraine
As ever, the challenge for
Ukraine's Zelensky
is to keep Russia's invasion in the global headlines, and he did that this year by tying Putin’s aggression to the world's broader fears, including
a
) repeated Russian violations elsewhere,
b
) the weak responses from bodies like the UN, and
c
) the risks this in turn poses for everyone else.
His strategy was to frame Ukraine's fate not as some distant dispute, but as
a canary in a much broader coalmine
that could harm us all unless we act.
Interestingly, Zelensky also weighed in on what he described as "
the most destructive arms race in human history
", a reference not just to drones, but also...
“
It's why I came to the UN: quiet diplomacy
” —
Artificial intelligence
Dozens of speakers weighed in on AI, framing the debate along familiar fault-lines:
i
) progress vs peril ("
innovation must serve humanity — not undermine it
"
🇺🇳
)
ii
) haves vs have-nots ("
AI must stand for ‘Africa Included’
"
🇳🇬
), and
iii
) human vs AI control ("
autonomous systems must never decide who lives
"
🇪🇺
)
But at least by UN standards, there was actually some progress this year, with the international community
agreeing
to launch
a
) a new
scientific panel
to help bridge AI’s tech↔policy gaps, and
b
) a new
dialogue
on AI governance to help bridge the haves↔have-nots gaps. Meanwhile, stark divisions were there for all to see, around…
"Peace, security and freedom are not finite commodities like land, oil or gold
” —
Israel-Palestine
Per UN tradition, the opening speaker slot went to Brazil, whose President
Lula
paired condemnation of 2023’s "
indefensible
" Hamas attacks with increasingly sharp criticism of Israel's response: "
nothing, absolutely nothing, justifies the ongoing genocide in Gaza
".
Israel's defiant
Netanyahu
, meanwhile, rejected claims of genocide (still before the International Court of Justice), instead insisting Israel "
must finish the job
" against Hamas. But fewer folks were listening by this point, because (as with almost all his UNGA addresses since 1998) delegates in the chamber staged a walk-out.
This year's
walkout
, however, was among the largest in UN history, involving an estimated ~80 nations in scenes Iran's supreme leader
tweeted
as evidence that "
the evil Zionist regime is the most despised and isolated regime
".
As with any world leader, however, Bibi was speaking as much to
a home audience
as to anybody abroad: his domestic critics cite the walkout as proof Bibi is irreparably harming Israel. His supporters? They see it as more proof of Israel's existential stakes.
But while Israeli-Palestinian topics dominated international headlines, the lowest-profile (yet widely cited) topic at this year’s UNGA might’ve been...
“
Even the lowest whisper can be heard... when it's telling the truth
” —
Development
The UN’s Antonio Guterres opened UNGA 2025 with a warning that the world is only on track to hit ~a third of its
Sustainable Development Goals
by the 2030 deadline.
And while he and Brazil's Lula contrasted that with today’s sharper security woes ("
bombs and nuclear weapons will not protect us from the climate crisis
"), many in the developing world — from Ghana to Barbados — highlighted another common thread: mounting
debt
.
And that actually brings us to a hopeful concluding note, because debt is an area where the UN has made a bit of progress this year: leaders used New York to take stock of ~130 practical initiatives the world adopted via July's '
Sevilla Commitmen
t'.
Maybe it’s a reminder that the UN, for all its many faults, can still help get stuff done.
Intrigue’s Take
We promised five quotes from
The Interpreter
, so
here’s your fifth
, dear Intriguer:
“
While there are now 191 nations represented, 140 more than there were in 1945, you'll only be required to learn the word ‘peace’ in the six languages spoken on the General Assembly floor.
”
That quote — and the whole movie — takes us back to its release 20 years ago, when it reflected an idealism and moral authority still permeating the UN and its role in the world. And that, in turn, takes us to a bonus fifth topic that’s dominated discussions at the UN this past week during its 80th anniversary:
UN reform
.
Just about everyone flagged the need for UN reform — not just those it’ll benefit (under-represented giants like India), but also those it’ll dilute (like Security Council member the UK). Both share the view that the
UN’s effectiveness
is closely tied to its credibility, which only gets weaker as the gap between the UN’s 1945 structure and modernity gets wider.
And while it’s
still mostly just reform rhetoric
, it’s getting more specific, congealing around specific asks like expanding the Security Council, and saving permanent seats for Africa and small island developing states.
Anyway, in the meantime, the UN is still the place where the world goes to argue (and occasionally agree) on how not to blow itself up. And in today’s world, that’s probably enough to stop the UN credits from rolling just yet.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇫🇷
FRANCE
-
Former president jailed.
A French court has jailed former president Nicolas Sarkozy for five years for trying to raise campaign funds from Libya’s late dictator Muammar Gaddafi. Sarkozy is dismissing the trial as political and says he’ll appeal. (
Reuters
)
Comment
: To give you a sense of the gravity here, the last French head of state to do time was Philippe Pétain (of collaborating-with-Nazis fame). Wanting more French political drama? Marine Le Pen’s embezzlement appeal kicks off in January.
🇲🇩
MOLDOVA
-
Pro-EU party wins.
Voters look to have re-elected President Maia Sandu’s pro-EU party on Sunday, in a widely-watched election seen as a choice between East (Russia) and West. (
EuroNews
)
Comment
: The main Kremlin-friendly party scored 24%, but is calling for protests. Our exclusive WhatsApp group has Intriguers on the ground with the latest: it’s free to join by sharing Intrigue with friends using your unique referral link down below!
🇦🇫
AFGHANISTAN
-
Freed.
The Taliban released another American citizen over the weekend, marking the fifth such Qatar-mediated release this year. The Qataris also helped secure the Taliban’s release of a British couple earlier this month. (
Al Jazeera
)
Comment:
It’s unclear what the Taliban might’ve received in return, though word is it could be a swap for an Afghan national held at Guantanamo without trial for years. It’s also a timely reminder, weeks after the Israeli strikes on Hamas members in Qatar, of the role the Gulf state still plays in helping Western powers deal with rogue groups.
🇩🇰
DENMARK
-
Open skies.
The Danes have banned civilian drones ahead of this week’s European leader summits on Wednesday and Thursday, after its armed forces spotted more mysterious devices hovering near sensitive military sites over the weekend. (
FT
$)
Comment
: Guess what’s topping the agenda for Wednesday’s EU summit? Yep, the idea of establishing a ‘drone wall’ to better repel Putin’s incursions.
🇻🇳
VIETNAM
-
Friends of all shapes.
Vietnam's Communist Party chief (Lam) is reportedly planning a rare visit to hermit North Korea next month. (
Straits Times
)
Comment
: Why? Likely a mix of reasons, both dull (75 years of diplomatic ties, and reciprocating Kim’s 2019 visit) and semi-spicy (Lam was just in rival South Korea to encourage more investment, so probably wants to square the ledger a little up North).
🇨🇴
COLOMBIA
-
Mind leaving?
US authorities have terminated the visa for Colombia’s President Petro after he called on US soldiers to
“disobey the orders of Trump”,
while near a Gaza-related protest in New York.
He was en route home when DC announced the move. (
AP
)
Comment
: Petro, who’s long spoken his mind about both President Trump and Gaza, might’ve also been hoping to rally his left-leaning base back home, where his approval keeps dropping amid a deteriorating security situation.
🇮🇶
IRAQ
-
OPEC watch.
The semi-autonomous Kurdistan region in northern Iraq has resumed pumping oil into neighbouring Turkey after a two-year halt, thanks to an interim revenue deal between Iraq’s federal government, its Kurdistan regional government, and foreign oil producers. (
Arab News
)
Extra Intrigue
🤣
Your weekly roundup of the world’s lighter news
Hershey has
successfully defeated a lawsuit
claiming its Halloween candy isn’t sufficiently spooky.
A Japanese man just
’ran’ 100 meters in 14.55
seconds on all fours.
Millennials unite, because the 1999
skateboard Tony Hawk used
to land the first-ever 900 trick just sold for $1.15M.
Meanwhile, a crab has somehow appeared riding
first class on a UK train
.
And a jet travelling from Milan to London has had to redirect after two passengers started
eating their passports
.
Beer of the day
If there’s one thing
The Simpsons
taught us, it’s that Australian prime ministers like beer. But we were still surprised to see Australia’s current prime minister repeatedly confirm this fact for us in recent days, including not only
a
) getting behind the bar and pouring beers at an Australian pub in New York last week, but also
b
) turning up at the UK prime minister’s residence in London over the weekend with a crisp four-pack of tinnies.
But these were
not your ordinary cans of beer
, dear Intriguer. No. These ones featured the PM’s (younger) face, and even his nickname (Albo). But who would craft such a brew?
Turns out it’s been around for years, with a brewery in Albanese’s Sydney electorate launching it back when he was
“simply the brewery's local Member of Parliament who was known for his support of the craft beer industry, trains and the occasional spot of DJing.”
Today’s poll
What's the best way to respond to persistent drone incursions?
🚫 Ban all drones
🚀 Shoot 'em down
🛡️  Expand no-fly zones
🎯 Retaliate against the sender
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Last Thursday’s poll:
Why is China forgoing its special WTO status?
🇺🇸
Better its negotiating position with the US (43%)
🤝
Win favour at the WTO (34%)
❌
It doesn't need the benefits (20%)
✍️ Other (Write Us!) (3%)
Your two cents:
🇺🇸
H.L:
“It is a move that costs China virtually nothing and potentially provides them with substantial benefits.”
🤝
E.K.H:
“It's not about the US, it's about everyone else. You can't look & act like the leader of the whole world while you're still using training wheels.”
✍️
N.R:
“All of the above.”