URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/oecd-cautiously-optimistic
Title: 🌍 The OECD is cautiously optimistic

IN TODAY’S EDITION
1️⃣ The world’s rich club is cautiously optimistic
2️⃣ The world gets its first AI government spokesperson
3️⃣ Diplomatic strategy of the week
Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Today’s briefing leads with
the OECD’s relatively rosy outlook
on the world around us. And we’ll get to that in a sec.
But in the meantime, a true story: while serving in Mexico City, I ended up winning the lucky-door prize at a gala ball: a business class return flight to Paris! But because I won the trip in my official capacity, I could only use it for official business.
That’s when the gods smiled down and scheduled a major meeting about Mexico at the world’s club of rich nations: the OECD. And yes, dear Intriguer, the OECD is headquartered in Paris. So I went.
Btw, if you ever tell a story that ends up falling flat, try finishing it with “
and then I found ten bucks!
”
THE HEADLINES
Hamas sends delegation to discuss ceasefire-hostage proposal.
Hamas has announced it will
send a delegation to Cairo
to discuss the latest ceasefire and hostage release deal as soon as possible. Ismail Haniyeh, its political leader, has “
stressed the positive spirit of the movement in studying the ceasefire proposal
”.
Biden addresses campus protests.
President
Joe Biden has addressed
ongoing Gaza protests on US college campuses, saying: “
It's a matter of what's right. There is the right to protest but not the right to cause chaos.
” Over 2,000 people have now been arrested in connection with the nationwide demonstrations.
Apple sales fall across the globe.
The latest figures reveal Apple
sales have fallen in every market
except Europe. iPhone sales dropped by 10% in the first three months of the year while overall revenues fell by around 4% - still less than expected. The tech giant sweetened the news by announcing a record $110B share buyback program.
British Conservatives suffer local losses.
It’s not looking great for PM Rishi Sunak’s party: the Conservatives have
lost nearly 100 seats
in yesterday’s local elections, ahead of a general election that could return the Labour Party to power after 14 years. Other parties such as the Liberal Democrats and the Greens also recorded some wins.
Myanmar military junta blocks men from leaving country.
The ruling junta has announced it’s no longer allowing men of conscription age to
travel outside the country
for work, months after issuing a conscription order that prompted nearly 100,000 men to apply for overseas work permits. The military is engaged in a gruelling war against multiple armed ethnic groups.
Dam breaks in Brazil after heavy rain.
A hydroelectric
dam has collapsed in Brazil
, with floods killing at least 30 people and displacing thousands more. The incident was triggered by days of uninterrupted heavy rains.
TOP STORY
The OECD is cautiously optimistic
Today we’re doing what we do best: wading through 200-something pages of turgid prose and acronyms to get you what you need to know.
The latest
Economic Outlook
from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) just dropped. And maybe it’s all that fresh spring-time air, but the Paris-based club of rich nations sounds pretty cheery.
Despite the geopolitical and other risks at play, the OECD says:
Inflation is easing faster than expected
Private sector confidence is improving
Global activity is more resilient than thought
Unemployment remains low, and
Growth in trade has finally turned positive
That’s why the OECD is revising up the growth estimate it just made in February, from 2.9% to 3.1%. But aggregate data only gets you so far, so let’s take a closer look:
🇺🇸
US
- “
The fiscal deficit is elevated as the US enters a period where spending on mandatory social programmes is rising due to population ageing
”
The US economy beat everyone’s expectations last year, but the OECD is echoing the IMF’s recent concerns about high US debt. The organisation’s boffins remain bullish for now, but they warn that “
efforts to narrow the deficit should be prioritised
”, especially given the country’s ageing population.
🇦🇷
Argentina
- “
High inflation, a sizeable but necessary fiscal adjustment, and policy uncertainty will weigh on private consumption and investment for most of 2024.
”
Translation: things in Argentina will get worse before they get better. The country’s economy contracted by 1.6% last year due in part to the massive (if unavoidable) currency devaluation by President Javier Milei. But the OECD believes Argentinians will see “
a gradual recovery in late 2024 and in 2025
”. Given the recent austerity protests, the words “
gradual
” and “
late
” might hit hard.
🇪🇺
EU
-
“
The [EU’s] economy remains resilient amid elevated geopolitical uncertainty
”
While the initial knock-on effects from Russia’s invasion of Ukraine are easing, underlying inflation remains stickier than a
kouign-amann
. It’s unlikely to return to the European Central Bank’s 2% target before 2025. So overall, the OECD is neither pumped nor worried about the Euro area’s immediate future. It’s ‘meh’.
🇨🇳
China -
“
Following a moderate rebound, the Chinese economy will return to its gradually slowing path with potential growth falling due to unfavourable demographics and slower productivity growth.
”
The OECD has slightly nudged up its forecasts for China, with a little help from government spending and recovering exports. But that’s no reason for Beijing to crack open the baijiu just yet, especially given the OECD’s warnings about China’s property markets, debt, and ageing. That’s why the world (or at least us) will be glued to the Communist Party’s long-delayed third plenum in July.
🇿🇦
South Africa
-
“
Parliamentary elections scheduled for late May have heightened uncertainty.
”
South Africa’s 29 May election is shaping up to be the most competitive since apartheid ended. The ruling African National Congress (ANC) party is now set to lose its decades-long majority in parliament, due in part to its inability to confront South Africa’s various economic problems.
Between blackouts, bottlenecks, and unemployment, growth came in at 0.4% in 2023, so the OECD is recommending a shopping list of structural changes: reducing government wages, reforming state-owned companies, fixing the energy grid, and slashing regulation. Seems easy enough, right…?
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
Is there any point to these kinds of international reports? Here are three:
Forecasting can be glorified guesswork, but it offers
something
to help investors, businesses, and governments nail that Jell-O to the wall
These reports can offer ammunition to domestic reformers, who
seize on specific lines
to try and shift the political debate at home, and
The reports are really the culmination of deep research by thousands of experts at both the OECD and IMF, and this research gets shared with the OECD’s 38 member governments who fund the organisation.
Plus, a fun fact to close: China isn’t an OECD member, but it’s a regular observer and participant, which makes sense when you remember that China is the top trade partner for most OECD members.
Also worth noting:
The OECD’s most important annual event is its Ministerial Council Meeting, which wraps in Paris today (Friday). The prime minister of Japan, Fumio Kishida, delivered the
opening address
yesterday on “
co-creating the flow of change
” to overcome global crises.
There are currently six countries in the process of
joining the OECD
: Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Croatia, Peru, and Romania, while Indonesia has expressed interest in
joining
.
WANT REGULAR SPECIAL EDITIONS OF INTRIGUE?
Get access to our bimonthly special editions by using your unique referral code to get two friends, colleagues, or even enemies to sign up for International Intrigue. The next two special editions will cover the current elections in India, and the upcoming elections in Mexico!
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇰🇬
Kyrgyzstan
: The Kyrgyzstan foreign ministry has
recommended
its citizens avoid travel to Russia. The Central Asian country now joins neighbouring Tajikistan, which warned last weekend against travel to Russia due to “
unfair treatment
” of its citizens.
🇺🇦
Ukraine
: Kyiv’s foreign ministry has
announced
it’ll use AI as its first “
digital representative
” to provide comment to the media. The spoken statements will be written by humans and will include QR codes back to the official government site to avoid deep fakes.
🇬🇧
Chagos Islands
: Exiled folks from the Chagos Islands,
a disputed British Indian Ocean Territory
, are saying their current home of Mauritius is altering their passports to show Mauritius as their birthplace. It’s seen as an attempt by Mauritius to bolster its claims to the Chagos.
🇨🇦
Canada
: Bank of Canada Governor Tiff Macklem has defended the bank’s decision to
keep rates at a near 23-year high
. He told parliament he first wants to see recent drops in inflation sustained, and said there’s a limit to how much Canada’s rates can diverge from the US.
🇹🇷
Turkey
: Ankara has reportedly
halted all trade with Israel
, a month after it imposed export controls on 54 products. Turkish officials say the trade halt will remain in place until Israel allows full humanitarian aid into Gaza.
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Some recommendations from Team Intrigue if you’re in
🇮🇪
Dublin
this weekend
Eat
: Book a table at ‘
Mister S
’ for a live fire grill experience to warm you up during the chilly Irish spring.
Visit
: Why not pop by the ‘
The Little Museum of Dublin
’, or you might prefer the ‘
The Irish Rock and Roll Museum Experience
’.
Walk:
Take a stroll down Bull Island, and be sure to go in the afternoon for the perfect picture of the sun setting across the bay.
DIPLOMATIC STRATEGY OF THE DAY
Credits: CFP.
Diplomacy comes in different shapes and sizes, but one of its most lovable (if sometimes contentious) iterations is bear-shaped. Earlier this week, a
pair of giant pandas
named Jin Xi and Zhu Yu touched down in Madrid, Spain after an exclusive long-haul flight directly from their home country of China.
Beijing has engaged in Panda diplomacy for decades, sending its national animal to faraway countries as a sort of furry ambassador. But sometimes China also withdraws them when relations get frosty, as happened with the US and UK last year.
FRIDAY QUIZ
1) What weapon did the signatories of the 1980 Geneva Convention on Inhumane Weapons agree to curtail on 3 May 1996?
Drones
Aerial bombs
Land mines
Grenades
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) Upon which modern-day island did Christopher Columbus set foot on 3 May 1494?
Bermuda
Jamaica
Haiti
Cuba
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) Which country cut diplomatic ties with the United States on 3 May 1965?
Cambodia
Bolivia
Turkey
South Africa
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Was this forwarded to you? We're a team of ex-diplomats producing a concise and engaging geopolitical briefing for 90k+ leaders each day.
It’s free to subscribe
.