URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/the-riyadh-comedy-festival
Title: 🌍 The Riyadh Comedy Festival!?

Today’s briefing:
— The Riyadh Comedy Festival!?
— Why Israelis are googling FIFA
— Get a room! (in this embassy)
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. A Saudi international student studying overseas contacts his family back in Riyadh, saying he felt bad that he was driving around in Maseratis while his classmates commuted on public transit.
His family said they understood why he felt bad, and would remedy the situation. So, the very next day, this Saudi student got his very own subway carriage and bus, just so he no longer felt left out. Badoomchh…!
Anyway, that was a terrible joke. And hopefully the ones at this year’s
Saudi Comedy Festival
are a bit better, as we’ll see in today’s top story.
Hacker group of the day
Radiant
That’s the name of a hacker group which targeted a British nursery chain before suddenly apologising, and claiming it’s now deleted the data (including pics of kids). It might’ve been a response to backlash from fellow hackers wary of drawing more official scrutiny.
Laughing stock
Saudi Arabia usually lands on the world’s front pages when oil prices move, a dissident turns up dead, or its crown prince flexes another billion-dollar venture.
This time it’s category three again, with the Kingdom now hosting the first-ever
Riyadh Comedy Festival
through 9 October.
Ordinarily we might respond with ‘meh’.
But that option faded like the Rosso Fuoco paint job on a Ferrari in the Saudi sun, once Riyadh started
billing
this as
the world’s largest comedy festival
, then announced their epic line-up of names like Bill Burr, Dave Chappelle, Chris Tucker, Kevin Hart, and 50 more.
And of course, that sparks a familiar debate:
The Saudi civil rights record
is no laughing matter: the Kingdom hit pause on executing journalists after copping blowback for hack-sawing US-based journalist Jamal Khashoggi in its Istanbul consulate in 2018. But it’s now hit that resume button this year,
beheading
(
🇸🇦
) Turki al-Jasser just in June. He was the journalist behind an anonymous X account highlighting royal corruption.
So the question of course becomes… are these millionaire Western entertainers
selling out their ideals
? The line-up even includes Pete Davidson, whose father died on 9/11, famously perpetrated by hijackers who were mostly (15 out of the 19) Saudi nationals.
Word is the main acts earned
a crisp $1.6M
to help them deal with any unease.
And… lest there be room for nuance around this old free speech debate, the Saudis even helpfully lobbed strict content rules into the mix,
banning jokes
about the Kingdom, its royals, or any religion. And one of the many funny things about this is the fact the line-up features comics whose
whole schtick
is railing against snowflakes who can’t take a joke.
And… just when you try to wedge a sliver of nuance into any incy remaining crack, the Saudis go ahead and
axe two comedians
because of stuff they said before game day:
Tim Dillon
shrugged that “
they are paying me enough money to look the other way
”, then got
canned
after joking about slave labour in the Kingdom, and
Jim Jefferies
disappeared too (from the line-up, to be clear!), though it’s unclear if it was because of his
reference
to Khashoggi’s murder, or his self-reference as a “
freedom-of-speech machine
” heading to Riyadh with zero censorship.
[Side-note, but the irreverent if often hilarious Jefferies is one of the few comedians to ever make us spit our tea in shock, and we can only imagine how his gig would’ve played in Riyadh].
Anyway, the comics have defended their attendance via a mix of
a
) you gotta pay the bills,
b
) it’s not like the West is perfect, and
c
) engagement is better than isolation.
And while you make up your own mind on the ethics, here’s the geopolitics in two points:
It’s a big PR move
This Riyadh Comedy Festival is part of Crown Prince Mohammad bin Salman’s
Vision 2030
, which aims to modernise and diversify his Kingdom’s economy. It’s the same driver behind his big moves in
sport
(football star Ronaldo just scored a cool $700M to stay), and
film
(celebs like Will Smith and Gwyneth Paltrow hit the 2023 Red Sea Film Festival).
Ie, spend enough cash and your turf eventually becomes a global events and tourism hub, less reliant on oil and gas, and more likely to attract Western investment, plus maybe even advanced arms sales (often blocked on human rights grounds).
But while several of the acts have argued the importance of engagement with the Saudis, the question is
who’s changing who
here: are these Western stars shaping Saudi views, or are they just shaping Western views towards the Saudis? Which brings us to…
Who’s the
real
target audience?
In a strict sense, it’s of course the predominantly-Saudi nationals lmao-ing in Riyadh’s Mohammed Al-Ali Theatre.
But the fact the event was pretty much exclusively in English also hints at two other aims:
first
, it’s probably aimed at keeping local elites happy with the Crown Prince’s endless rule.
But
second
, it’s probably also aimed at luring high-cash, high-influence citizens of the USA and the broader West, in hopes of amplifying all the artwashing.
And Bill Burr is already playing his part, pivoting from a 2016 refusal to do a local gig lest he get his “
head sawed off
”, to now
praising
the whole thing: “
they just wanted to laugh!
”
We can only guess whether locals like
Abdulrahman al-Sadhan
(the satirist doing 20 years for tweets), or
Manahel al-Otaibi
(the fitness instructor doing 11 years for pics without her abaya), or ‘
A
’ (the pseudonym for one of the many doing time for converting to Christianity) were also eagerly jumping aboard Burr’s roflcopter.
Intrigue’s Take
We love jokes as much as the next guy (unless the next guy is Turki Alalshikh, the festival’s royal advisor, who allegedly detains folks that annoy him on social media).
Anyway, there’s that classic line about how the world has always been more impressed by the power of America’s example rather than the example of America’s power.
And yet the thing about all the recent turmoil in the US is not only that folks abroad lose interest in any more US lectures, but that Americans themselves might stop caring: several of the US comics onstage in Riyadh cited threats to freedom of speech back home as reasons why they should just take cash from the Saudis and anyone else willing to pay.
Sound even smarter:
Yesterday (Thursday) marked seven years since Saudi agents murdered Khashoggi.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇬🇧
UNITED KINGDOM
-
Terrorist attack
.
Prime Minister Starmer has vowed to do everything in his power to protect Jewish people in the UK after a British national identified as Jihad Al-Shamie attacked worshippers in a Manchester synagogue on Yom Kippur, leaving two dead. (
BBC
)
🇷🇺
RUSSIA
-
Threats on threats
.
Putin has used his speech at an annual think tank forum in Sochi to vow a response to what he described as Europe’s militarisation. (
Moscow Times
)
Comment:
He didn’t mention that any European ramp-up in defence spending is a reluctant response to Putin’s invasion of Ukraine. Meanwhile, Munich just joined the list of Europe’s airports getting shut down by mysterious drone sightings...
🇬🇪
GEORGIA
-
Report to the MFA.
Georgia’s foreign ministry has hauled the German and British ambassadors in for a slap on the wrist over claims they’re meddling in Georgia’s affairs (a presumed reference to recent remarks about its stalled EU bid). (
Georgia Today
)
Comment:
It’s pretty normal for ambassadors to weigh in on any issue — and meet any individual — relevant to their own national interest. So this drama is more a reflection of the ruling party’s sensitivity, including over its Moscow-friendly pivot.
🇬🇷
GREECE
-
Jets for sale?
NATO allies (particularly the US and France) are pushing Greece to sell its ageing Mirage fighter jets for transfer to Ukraine, but Athens isn’t keen. (
Ekathimerini
)
Comment:
Greek reluctance to offer more than token support for Ukraine’s self-defence likely stems from
a
) a preference to prioritise rival Turkey, and
b
) an aversion to antagonising Russia, whose tourists help the Greek economy hum.
🇭🇰
HONG KONG
-
Consul-General called out.
DC is dismissing a top Beijing official’s
warning
against America’s new Consul-General in Hong Kong from meeting “
anti-China forces
”. (
Al Jazeera
)
Comment
: China’s warning seems to be a reference to Julie Eadeh’s earlier stint in Hong Kong, when authorities leaked a pic of her meeting student protestors in a hotel lobby at the height of the city’s 2019 pro-democracy protests.
🇲🇽
MEXICO
-
Good grades.
President Sheinbaum has finished her first year in office with a 78% approval rating, higher even than her polarising but popular predecessor ‘AMLO’. (
El País
)
Comment:
Sheinbaum even enjoys broad support from opposition voters, suggesting she might (in addition to any specific wins) be enjoying a rally-around-the-flag effect amid pressure from the Trump administration.
🇱🇧
LEBANON
-
Money for change?
The US has released $230M in additional funding for Lebanon's security forces, as Beirut pushes to disarm the once-dominant group, Hezbollah. (
Times of Israel
)
Comment:
The US has been helping fund Lebanon’s military since 2006, and it’s now one of the nation’s most widely-respected institutions. The idea has been to build the armed forces as a stabilising force and a counter to Hezbollah. But this year’s US funding approval stands out a little more amid such heavy cuts to US aid elsewhere.
Extra Intrigue
Here’s what people around the world are googling
🇺🇸
US
fans are looking up Taylor Swift’s new album (
The Life of a Showgirl),
with some even planning to
take the day off work
.
🇮🇱
Israelis
searched for ‘FIFA’
after the body’s president declined to suspend Israeli teams, arguing the football association “
cannot solve geopolitical problems.
”
And
🇧🇷
netizens in Brazil
googled
‘WhatsApp’
after the messaging platform updated its offerings to allow AI video backgrounds and live motion photos.
Hotel of the day
Credits: Vincent and Partners
We’ve featured former embassies going under the hammer for vast sums, so with recession indicators flashing, it's high time we offered a more budget-friendly option.
Enter the former US embassy in London, now reborn as The Chancery Rosewood Hotel in Grosvenor Square. Owned by the Qatari royal family, even the cheap rooms start at over a 1000 quid a night, which is why we’re eyeing a sneaky visit to the rooftop Eagle Bar or the Jacqueline tea room instead.
Good timing to open its doors, with the third season of
The Diplomat —
set in the US embassy in London — about to drop (hello Intriguers in the writers room
👋
).
Friday Quiz
Test your knowledge of this week’s news!
How long did the last US government shutdown run?
14 days
35 days
54 days
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Which country expelled Israeli diplomats this week?
Austria
Canada
Colombia
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Which country's credit rating was most recently upgraded?
Kenya
Mongolia
Spain
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate