URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/the-last-us-russia-nuke-pact-dies
Title: 🌍 The last US-Russia nuke pact dies

Today’s briefing:
— The last US-Russia nuke pact dies
— Go join the Peace Corps in Vietnam
— The ambassador has a boss
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. If you’re like me, you’d probably not heard of this thing called
the New START treaty
. Or thought it referred to a student loan forgiveness program for those who sought a… new start.
In actual fact, this rather benign sounding treaty is actually quite the big deal. It refers to the last remaining nuclear arms control pact between the US and Russia, and is due to expire Thursday. Just when we thought 2026 had enough nerve-wracking moments.
That’s our top story today, so let’s dive in.
Number of the day
521
That’s how many missiles and drones Putin launched at Ukraine overnight, days after President Trump reported Putin would hit pause due to Ukraine’s brutal winter.
Nuclear reaction
Some things are good to let expire — like your ✌️free✌️ LinkedIn Premium trial, or that Salesforce subscription sending you breathless 2am emails about Q4 pipeline hygiene.
But what about the last remaining nuclear treaty between the two powers still sitting on ~90% of the world’s nukes?
That’s what happens tomorrow (Thursday), when the US-Russia
New Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty
(New START) expires, with no clear plans on what’s next.
So with that cheerful swan-dive into your inbox, let’s get you briefed, starting back in…
📅
8 April 2010
The Burj Khalifa had just opened, the first iPad had just gone on sale, and KFC had just announced its new ‘Double Down’ burger, innovatively using fried chicken as the bread.
Meanwhile, President Obama appeared in Prague to sign
New START
with Russia’s then-president, Dmitry Medvedev. This was back when…
The world still saw
Medvedev
as a younger, more reformist Russian leader, and
Lavrov and Clinton had just pushed their famous novelty ‘
reset
’ button in Geneva.
So with Obama diagnosing US-Russia ties as entering a “
dangerous drift
”, and their original START treaty having just expired in December 2009, this new treaty pledged to...
~Halve their nukes
to a maximum of 1,550 deployed warheads, and
Resume
on-site inspections
to ensure they were each upholding their end.
In theory, it was all about reducing risks, cutting costs, restoring transparency, and rebuilding trust, all without giving up any meaningful military advantage.
So… did it work?
A State staffer famously mistranslated that big novelty ‘reset’ button as ‘
overload
’ in Russian, hinting at some of the trouble to come, but things started out okay: the two old foes slashed their nukes while ticking off 328 inspections and ~25,000 notifications.
There were spats, but nothing to stop Biden and Putin signing a 5-year renewal in 2021, until
things went sour
— Putin attacked Ukraine, then paused his treaty participation after the US helped Ukraine defend itself. But the treaty was already wobbly, because…
Covid
had halted in-person inspections
Putin argued the US was exploiting
loopholes
, and
The US had already elected its own START-sceptic president (
Trump
).
Their complaints?
Putin
argued US defence tech was undermining the treaty by neutralising Russia’s nukes, whether via defence (anti-ballistic systems) or offence (non-nuclear fast-strikes).
And
Trump
hated the way the treaty tied America’s hands while allowing China’s own massive nuclear ramp-up; he also accused Putin of cheating on a related 1987 treaty via Russia’s new SSC-8 cruise missile. Trump ditched that treaty in 2019, and Putin now uses that missile against Ukrainian cities (turns out it’s got double the range Putin claimed).
And as for those hopes of a new Russia?
Medvedev turned out to be Putin’s seat-warmer, not to mention a fascist drunk. And the Kremlin went on to assassinate more critics, steal more turf (Crimea), prop up Syria’s Assad regime, interfere in the 2016 US election, carry out historic cyberattacks (SolarWinds), then start a full war on Ukraine.
And… that pretty much brings us to today! So will the US and Russia extend New START?
Neither side is keen
— Putin’s extension offer is only for a year, and wouldn’t include on-site inspections (so it’s worthless). Plus he’s now testing the “
invincible weapons
” he announced back in 2018 as a very naked way to evade New START limits — eg, his Burevestnik
ground
-launched missile or his Poseidon drone submarine.
Meanwhile, Trump wants to resume some nuclear testing plus his big Golden Dome defence plans. He also says he can deliver
a better deal
that’d include China, but Xi has zero interest in slowing down — he just
more-than-doubled
his own arsenal to ~600 in five years.
Intrigue’s Take
The Cold War brought us dangerously close to nuclear annihilation, whether 1962’s Cuban missile crisis, or 1983’s Able Archer scare. On that last point,
MI6’s greatest (known) spy
in history, KGB officer Oleg Gordievsky, ended up providing the Brits with striking insights into Soviet thinking: even with all available intel confirming Archer was seriously just a US drill, they
viewed that evidence itself
as mere deception to mask an imminent US strike!
At one point, the Soviets even stole secret NATO war plans confirming the bloc was indeed just defensive, but even that wasn’t enough — Moscow officials later
told
their exasperated American counterparts: “
We simply did not believe that.
”
So sometimes Western leaders come along, convinced
sheer sincerity and charm
might be enough to break the cycle: FDR told his treasury secretary, “
if I could just talk to Stalin personally, I could straighten it all out
”; Bush Jr famously claimed he’d seen Putin’s soul; Obama tried the big reset button; and Trump still seems to believe in his Putin rapport.
Meanwhile, sure, treaties help — in fact, it was precisely during the Cold War’s scariest years that these two foes agreed on their historic pacts, whether to ban certain nuclear tests, demilitarise Outer Space and the Antarctic, and even halt the yawning ozone hole.
But any Western gesture still risks getting stuck downstream of trust, and trust is ultimately downstream of ideology: that’s because ultimately, Putin is still projecting the Kremlin’s historic "
кто кого
" ("
who’ll vanquish whom
") binary onto the world around it.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇮🇷
IRAN — Drone down.
The US Navy has reportedly shot down an Iranian drone that “
aggressively approached
” the USS Abraham Lincoln. Hours later, Iranian forces threatened to (but didn’t) board a US-flagged tanker transiting the Strait of Hormuz. (
CNBC
)
Comment
:
The drone incident alone was enough to spike oil markets by 1% — the White House still says Iran talks will continue. We explored this one
yesterday
.
🇷🇺
RUSSIA — Compromised communications.
EU officials believe Russia has intercepted some 10 key satellites over Europe, compromising their comms and potentially enabling Moscow to manoeuvre or destroy them. (
FT
$)
Comment
:
At this point, the only surprising thing about these stories is the way legacy outlets still act shocked — anything of value not beyond an airgap (plus military grade encryption) has quite likely been compromised for years.
🇱🇾
LIBYA — Son down.
Someone has assassinated the son and once-heir apparent of Libya’s late dictator (Gaddafi) in his home southwest of Tripoli. (
Al-Jazeera
)
Comment
:
There’s a long list of suspects given Junior’s pivot from the more urbane face of his dad’s regime, to a core architect of his brutal 2011 crackdown.
🇪🇸
SPAIN — Go touch grass.
Spain’s Pedro Sánchez has announced his government will seek to ban social media access for under-16s in a bid to shield kids from online harm and (via big penalties on platform executives) reassert democratic control. (
NYT
)
Comment
:
Sanchez is just the latest to join Australia’s historic U-16s ban, which we
explored
when it entered force weeks ago. Greece might be next. Meanwhile,
a familiar spat
has erupted between
France and X
(née Twitter), with Paris describing its latest raid on X offices as part of a criminal probe into child exploitation material, while Musk argues it’s just censorship masquerading as child-safety.
🇦🇺
AUSTRALIA
— Love us some aviation news.
Japan’s main development bank is stepping in to help re-shore control of Jetstar Japan, a budget carrier first launched by Australia’s flag carrier, Qantas. (
Skift
)
Comment
:
Why? The development bank’s involvement suggests some kind of policy goal for Japan — probably to
a
) capture more of the inbound tourism boom,
b
) redirect more visitors beyond Tokyo, and
c
) further expand Japan’s budget airline segment. As for Qantas, its new CEO is exiting capital-intensive investments abroad to refocus on Australia’s famously
expensive
profitable routes back home, while freeing up cash for some much-needed fleet renewal.
🇨🇴
COLOMBIA — Change of pace.
In a turnaround for the ages, President Trump has gone from declaring his Colombian counterpart (Petro) an “
illegal drug leader
” and revoking his US visa, to praising him as “
terrific
” and even signalling renewed counternarcotics work. (
AP
)
Comment
:
Why the sudden change of heart? Trump needs Colombia’s help to stabilise Venezuela next door, while stable US ties might help Petro’s left-leaning successor (Senator Cepeda), who faces a tough May election against a resurgent right.
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES — My precious.
President Trump has announced a new $12B critical mineral stockpile to counter China’s supply chain dominance. Dubbed ‘Project Vault’, it’ll reportedly involve another 11 countries to be announced later this week. (
Guardian
)
Comment
:
Pitched as today’s equivalent to a strategic petroleum reserve, it’s part of DC’s continued adaptation to the reality (made painfully clear last year) that China has massive critical mineral leverage over the US, particularly in processing.
🇰🇬
KYRGYZSTAN — Bypass no more.
The EU is reportedly preparing to sanction Kyrgyzstan for helping Russia evade Western restrictions, potentially making it the first Central Asian country to face EU sanctions as Brussels targets Moscow’s economic loopholes. (
EurasiaNet
)
Extra Intrigue
The Intrigue jobs board
💼
Associate, Mexico & Central America
@
Ford Foundation
in Mexico City
Senior Director, International Government @
Coca-Cola
in DC
Foreign Trade Expert @
Zeiss
in Germany
English Teacher Volunteer
@
Peace Corps
in Vietnam
Meme of the day
A recent edition’s ad reminded us of the above viral Intrigue meme. Don’t be distracted by John Daly’s happy pants, or the fact he’s casually punching an on-green dart at the 150th Open in Scotland, or the humorous contrast with a more staid-looking Tiger Woods.
The key message is that if you think making ambassador means you’re now the boss, you’re wrong. The boss is still actually the embassy’s long-serving local employee who’s calmly watched 10 of your ambassadorial predecessors come and go, and will eventually watch you depart too, but not before politely (and correctly) explaining why you’re wrong.
Today’s poll
What do you think will happen after New START expires?
🚀 A nuclear arms race
🖊️ They'll negotiate a new deal
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think Trump will hit Iran again?
❌
No, it's a bluff to force concessions (21%)
✅
Yes, he wants regime change (29%)
🧐
Just limited strikes to shape talks (48%)
✍️ Other (write us!) (2%)
Your two cents:
🧐
J.S:
“He wants concessions to get back to a deal that Obama had already inked. The only difference will be the cash he puts in his pocket as a result.”
❌
P.F:
“It's a bluff but if the concessions don't come... boom.”
✅
M.P:
“Just get a legacy.”