URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/reduced-size-template-307eeec8adffc31b
Title: 🌍 The geopolitics of Charlie Kirk’s murder

Today’s briefing:
— The geopolitics of Charlie Kirk’s murder
— Why tourists got stuck in Machu Picchu
— These are Germany’s true heroes?
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. I’m back from Seoul and the jetlag is real and it is brutal. It’s everything I can do to stop myself telling my friends with young kids that “
I totally get what it’s like
”.
Before we get stuck into today’s story about
the geopolitical fallout from Charlie Kirk’s murder
(can’t wait for the emails on this one!), allow me to give a full-throated endorsement of Seoul.
Unbelievable food?
✅
Clean streets and immaculate public transport?
✅
Unbelievably friendly people?
✅
A brand of pop music that you can’t avoid hearing in every store and then have stuck in your head for 8 days and counting?
✅
✅
✅
(And yes, I’m talking about ‘Golden’ from KPop Demon Hunters)
You know what folks, I’m gonna send you into the weekend with the spiciest of takes - I prefer Seoul to Tokyo. If you have the opportunity, get yourself there.
Call of the day
9.00am
(DC Time)
That’s when President Trump is due to speak with his Chinese counterpart Xi Jinping today (Friday), before announcing a possible deal to bring TikTok’s US operations under US ownership.
Temperature rising
We didn’t build Intrigue to weigh in on the kinds of issues now dividing America, but the shooting of conservative activist Charlie Kirk has reverberated all around the world.
So you can bet most of the ~180 embassies in DC will have written home about Kirk’s murder, trying to untangle what it all means. Here’s a quick tour down Embassy Row:
🇮🇱
Israel
Israel’s Benjamin Netanyahu was among the first leaders to
mourn
Kirk’s shooting, describing the 31-year-old as a “
lion-hearted friend of Israel
”. Why?
Kirk
defended Israel
’s response to the Hamas attacks, rejected antisemitism as evil, and staunchly backed the US-Israel alliance. Like many (though not all) American church-goers, he also saw a link between modern Israel and his faith.
But
initial MAGA unity
around his death is now also partly unravelling over Israel, with some claiming Kirk was privately a little more critical of Jewish people and the Jewish state than he let on publicly (the internet has resurfaced quotes along these lines). Either way, it all hints at
a deeper split
between the more isolationist parts of Trump’s base, and those feeling bound to Israel over religious and/or democratic affinity.
And we wouldn’t ordinarily brief you on
conspiracy theories
, but some voices emerging out of this split have now made enough noise for Netanyahu himself to weigh in and reject the idea Israel was somehow involved in Kirk’s death as “
monstrous
” and “
insane
”.
Anyway, for Israel, it all reflects
two big problems
:
first
, with a vanishingly small
minority
of young Americans (18-34) still supporting Israel’s actions in Gaza, it’s now lost a key ally within Trump’s young conservative base. And
second
, it’s all laid bare that even within Trump’s base, there are now divisions over continued US support.
But while Kirk pushed back on any isolationist instincts towards Israel, he embraced that philosophy a little more when it came to…
🇺🇦
Ukraine
Kirk was widely known among several US allies in Europe over his
scepticism around US support for Ukraine’s self-defence
— this ranged from characterising Putin’s war as a distant border dispute, and Zelensky as a CIA puppet, through to flagging the risks of the US becoming embroiled in another ‘forever war’, if not a full nuclear conflict.
So while most of Trump’s party (and the American public) now want to see
more
US support for Ukraine’s self-defence against Putin’s aggression, Kirk often stood out as one of the more influential proponents of
the opposite view
.
The risk for Ukraine has now been in Putin’s predictable efforts to somehow tie Kyiv to Kirk’s shooting (indeed, Russian propaganda just rolled out a fugitive pro-Moscow Ukrainian MP to make that exact claim).
And speaking of propaganda…
🇷🇺
Russia
,
🇨🇳
China
,
🇮🇷
Iran
Accounts linked to Moscow, Beijing, and Tehran have been in overdrive since Kirk’s assassination, though each with a slightly different angle:
Putin’s
Russia Today
tweeted about Kirk’s murder 39 times in 24 hours, not just trying to blame Ukraine, but also amplifying incendiary stuff in hopes of further inflaming US divisions. That’s because Russian propaganda is often less about getting the West to believe
some
thing, and more about it believing
nothing
— because when you believe nothing, you do nothing.
Iran
’s propagandists have also been pushing the above Israel conspiracy theories, in hopes of eroding US support for the regime’s arch rival. And…
Beijing
has been at it too. But (unlike Moscow or Tehran), for China it’s less about trying to pin Kirk’s assassination on an enemy, and more about framing the US itself as a source of chaos and extremism. This suits the ruling Communist Party, both as a way to cast the US as an unreliable ally for anyone else abroad, but also to draw a neat contrast to its own claims of legitimacy via order back home.
But at the end of the day, these and other foreign powers are often just fanning the flames of a wildfire already roaring across the US.
Intrigue’s Take
Jefferson, Jackson, Lincoln, Roosevelt, Wilson, FDR, Eisenhower, JFK, Nixon, Carter, Reagan, Bush Sr, Clinton, Bush Jr, Obama, Trump, and Biden.
Know something these US presidents all have in common?
They’ve all at one point or another — in one way or another — said the same thing that occasionally gets uttered on-stage at stuffy think-tank panel discussions to wake the audience up.
Ultimately, they argue,
the greatest threat to America
comes not from abroad, but from within.
Sure, these presidents have made their comments in different centuries and with different intent. You might even ascribe blame to some of them.
But the basic point holds true to us, and DC embassies (whether friend or foe) will all now be assessing to what extent Kirk’s campus assassination reflects
a deeper cancer of polarisation and political violence
within the US — the last year alone has also included two assassination attempts on President Trump, the torching of the Pennsylvania governor’s house, and two Minnesota lawmakers shot (one fatally) at their homes.
For foes
, a divided, distracted and distrustful America is a weaker America, less willing or able to throw its weight abroad, whether to deter Xi from taking Taiwan, Putin from taking Ukraine, or the Ayatollahs from getting nukes. It’s also arguably an America with less credibility to weigh in amid political violence or the stifling of free speech elsewhere.
As for allies
, that same divided, distracted, and distrustful America hints at a power that’s not only less willing or able to back its friends abroad, but also just more likely to pull up its drawbridge and withdraw back home. And that’ll spook the dozens of smaller nations still relying on the international order the US spent most of its post-WWII life building.
So overall, the kind of fractured US revealed around Kirk’s murder is one that’s chilling for friends, and thrilling for foes.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
Nvidia’s got good Intel.
Chipmaker Nvidia has announced it’ll invest $5B in struggling local competitor Intel, making Nvidia one of Intel’s biggest shareholders (along with the US government). (
CNN
)
Comment:
The deal potentially leverages Intel’s US foundries to help Nvidia diversify, breathes life into Intel, and keeps both players aligned with the White House’s domestic chip production agenda.
🇦🇫
AFGHANISTAN
-
I’d like that back.
President Trump has said he wants the Bagram Airbase in Afghanistan back, noting its location would offer the US strategic advantages in countering China. (
FT
$)
Comment:
It’s hard to see which is the biggest obstacle ahead here: convincing the Taliban to hand that (Soviet-built) base over, or convincing US voters it’s worth sending troops back again.
🇦🇲
ARMENIA
-
Lights out.
For the third time in as many months, Gazprom has halted gas supplies to Armenia over purported repairs, though this time Russia’s gas giant only made the announcement 24 hours before the cut-off began. (
Eurasianet
)
Comment:
It looks a lot like a Kremlin attempt to impose costs on Armenia for its cautious pivot West. It’s a fine balance for Putin, who risks just validating his critics in Armenia with this kind of move. As always, a dash of plausible deniability is key.
🇮🇸
ICELAND
-
Private, public divide.
Responding to government pledges to focus on a renewable future (it’s almost 100% hydro and geothermal already), Iceland’s chamber of commerce is calling for more oil exploration, arguing it could unlock half a trillion in revenue. (
Euractiv
)
Comment
: Iceland has a maritime boundary with Norway, and must be among the long list of countries now quietly yearning for Oslo’s staggering oil and gas wealth.
🇲🇻
MALDIVES
-
Media freedom.
Journalists are hoping the Maldivian supreme court will intervene now that President Muizzu has signed a new law granting the government sweeping powers to fine, suspend, and block media outlets. (
IFJ
)
Comment
: Authorities are making familiar arguments that this is about simplifying regulations and helping fight against mis-and-disinformation. But it’s hard for folks to have faith in those pro-transparency claims when the bill itself was opaquely rushed through parliament (journalists were blocked from committee hearings).
🇲🇽
MEXICO
-
Howdy neighbour.
Canada’s Mark Carney has been in Mexico City this week for chats with President Sheinbaum, ahead of US-Mexico-Canada trade pact renewal talks next year. (
AP
)
Comment
: The logic behind this USMCA bloc has always been to harness Mexican labour, Canadian resources, and American tech and capital to out-compete the world. But with Trump’s tariffs disrupting that vision, Canada and Mexico are trying to strike the balance of maintaining a united front without seeming like they’re ganging up.
🇮🇷
IRAN
-
The final countdown.
France’s Emmanuel Macron has announced that Europe will likely reimpose UN ‘snapback’ sanctions on Iran by the end of this month, after France, Germany and the UK triggered a formal 30-day process accusing Tehran of breaching the 2015 nuclear deal. (
Al Jazeera
)
Extra Intrigue
In other worlds…
Tech:
Various countries are struggling to match their big AI ambitions with the
massive energy demands involved
.
Spying:
The UK’s MI6 intelligence agency is launching a new online portal (
Silent Courier
) to allow sources in hostile countries to securely send info to London.
Tourism:
Upwards of 900 tourists have found themselves trapped in Machu Picchu, after local protestors blocked a train in anger over an alleged
lack of transparency
in dishing out transport contracts.
Celebration of the day
Credits: Oktoberfest.de
Tomorrow (Saturday) is the official kick-off for Germany’s beloved beer-drinking, sauerkraut consuming, and dirndl-wearing festival of
Oktoberfest
(often known locally as Wiesn). It almost evaded Intrigue’s legendary radar until Heidi Klum splashed across German papers after the supermodel somehow managed to get the Hofbräuhaus in Munich to open early so she could host her own ‘HeidiFest’!
Alas, that has nothing to do with the picture above which is the official beer jug, released every year, and dedicated for 2025 in honour of the legendary wait staff. Able to carry six beers at once, dressed to the nines in traditional clothing, and quick on their feet, the designers are declaring these workers the
“
true heroes
”
of the festival.
Compare these Munich workers to those up north in Demmin who once famously spilled five full glasses of beer down the back of ex-chancellor, Angela Merkel.
Friday quiz
Tomorrow (Saturday) is World Cleanup Day.
1) How big is the great pacific garbage patch?
1 million square kilometers
1.6 million square kilometers
3.3 million square kilometers
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) Who is the world's biggest plastic polluter?
(meaning its products were found polluting the most countries with the most waste, per 'Break Free From Plastic')
Nestle
Coca-Cola Company
P&G
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) When did the UN formally adopt World Cleanup Day?
1999
2012
2023
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate