URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/israeli-government-suspends-judicial-overhaul
Title: 🌍 The Israeli government suspends its judicial overhaul

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
We’ve all seen it before: Kevin from HR comes into work with a runny nose, and next thing you know the entire office is sick. But it’s not often that Kevin’s carelessness ends up taking down a world leader: Brazil’s President got sick over the weekend and had to
cancel his state visit to China
. Just stay at home, Kevin!
Today’s briefing is a 4.5 min read:
🇮🇱
Israel’s
ruling coalition pauses its judicial overhaul.
🇷🇺
Russia
will deploy tactical nukes to
Belarus
.
➕
Plus:
El Salvador’s state of exception, how the papers are covering billionaire Jack Ma’s return to the public eye, and Qatar takes centre stage.
🍎
PS:
Intrigue co-founders Helen and John are touching down in the Big Apple on Wednesday, 19 April, and they’d love to meet our NY-based readers. Stay tuned for more information by
letting us know if you can make it
.
🗺️ AROUND THE WORLD
🇰🇿
Kazakhstan:
Officials in Kazakhstan have
implemented stricter rules
to uphold Western sanctions against neighbouring Russia (Kazakhstan’s largest trade partner).
🇩🇪
Germany
: A referendum to
accelerate Berlin’s climate policies
failed on Sunday. It would’ve required the city to reach net zero by 2030, fifteen years before the rest of Germany.
🇹🇼
Taiwan
: Honduras officially ended 72-years of
relations with Taiwan
on Sunday, and switched its recognition to Beijing. Taiwan said Honduras had demanded billions of dollars to maintain relations.
🇨🇺
Cuba
: More than
two-thirds of eligible Cubans voted
on Sunday to elect a new
opposition-free
parliament. Pro-democracy figures had hoped more citizens would abstain from voting, to express their frustration with the country’s direction.
🇧🇫
Burkina Faso
: The ruling junta has
suspended a French broadcaster
, France24, after the network aired an interview with a local Al Qaeda leader. The junta expelled the French army last year.
🇮🇱
ISRAEL | POLITICS
Bibi might be flying too close to the sun.
Netanyahu finally flinches after months of protests
Briefly:
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin (Bibi) Netanyahu suspended his controversial judicial reforms on Monday after the country’s turmoil started to spread to the military, universities and beyond. The defiant PM said he’ll push the reforms again in late April when Israel’s Knesset (parliament) returns from recess.
The crisis escalated
over the weekend when Israel’s defence minister warned the proposed overhaul (weakening the Supreme Court) was endangering Israel’s security; he said many armed force reservists were now refusing to serve.
But when Bibi promptly fired the defence minister, half a million Israelis took to the streets, and many stuck around until they were water-cannoned home at 3 AM.
Israel’s main trade union
also called a national strike, shuttering flights, universities, Israeli embassies abroad, and even the country’s McDonald’s branches.
Intrigue’s take:
Netanyahu is one of the world’s savviest political operators, but he’s now tied himself up in a classic Gordian knot:
He can’t afford the legislation’s opponents grinding the country to a halt any longer, and yet
He can’t afford to abandon the legislation either, as some of its backers have threatened to ditch Bibi’s fragile coalition and trigger new elections.
Bibi’s decision to briefly suspend the judicial overhaul buys him some time to lower the temperature and maybe negotiate a way forward. He’s shown a remarkable instinct for this kind of political survival over the years. But this time around, might he have flown too close to the sun?
Also worth noting:
Polling shows only
17% of Israelis
support the current reform proposals.
Israel’s closest ally (the US) has
expressed caution
over the reforms.
In exchange for backing the delay, Netanyahu agreed to allow one of his coalition’s most right-wing members to
form and oversee a new Israeli National Guard
, which some are calling a “personal militia”.
📰
GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES
How different newspapers covered
: A rare public reappearance from Jack Ma, the Alibaba co-founder who landed in hot water after criticising authorities in China.
Links
:
Financial Times
,
Nikkei Asia
,
SCMP
.
Today’s briefing is sponsored by
Policyware
Become an expert by learning from one, and even get your job to pay for it.
Poulsen is a Professor of International Relations & Law at University College London. He is also chair of the OECD inter-governmental work with stakeholders and experts on investment treaties, where he leads discussions on investment treaties and climate change policy.
In this course, you can learn at your own pace with both live and recorded lecture options.
Courses are eligible for corporate reimbursement!
Become an expert.
🇷🇺
RUSSIA | NUCLEAR WEAPONS
To Lukashenko with love, Putin.
Russia to deploy tactical nukes to Belarus
Briefly:
Russian president Vladimir Putin has announced
plans to deploy tactical nuclear weapons to Belarus
by July. Putin said he took the decision after the UK announced it was supplying Ukraine with anti-tank munitions containing depleted uranium.
The West
criticised the move
as a dangerous escalation, noting the UK’s depleted uranium shells aren’t nuclear weapons: they’ve been stripped of most radioactive material, but have extra density that can pierce a tank’s armour.
On the other hand, tactical nukes can flatten cities (and
strategic
nukes can flatten countries). For his part, Putin pointed out that the US has stationed nuclear weapons in Europe for decades.
Intrigue’s take:
Anyone else feel deja-vu? Putin has made various nuclear threats since invading Ukraine, but little has come of it so far.
In February 2022, he put Russia’s nuclear arsenal on high alert.
In September 2022, Putin said his nuclear threats were “not a bluff”.
In February 2023, he
suspended Russia’s participation in the New START
nuclear arms reduction treaty.
Even
Russian analysts
quoted by state media aren’t sure Moscow will actually go though with the plans.
Still, we’re talking about nukes here. And Belarus already amended its constitution back in December 2021 to host them. So on this topic (if nothing else), we continue to take Putin at his word.
Also worth noting:
Speaking of taking Putin at his word, his announcement comes just days after he and Chinese President Xi Jinping
called for the removal of all nuclear weapons
stationed in third countries - awkward.
👀
EXTRA INTRIGUE
We’re very online, so you don’t have to be.
Bali wants to make it harder for Russians and Ukrainians to get visas
($)
Taiwan can’t win the recognition war with China, a new strategy is needed
Qatar’s debut on the world stage
Did Shell's oil divestments improve Nigeria's environment?
($)
Will North America take advantage of its global strength?
💬
QUOTE OF THE DAY
Analyst Tiziano Breda told
Intrigue Outloud
that El Salvador’s ‘state of exception’ is leading to a spectacular drop in violent crime, but could cause broader harm if it continues indefinitely. Hear more on
Spotify
,
Apple Podcasts
, or
wherever
.
Do you think Israeli PM Netanyahu will manage to pass his judicial overhaul?
👍 Yes, he'll find a way (he always does)
🙅 No, he's now facing way too much opposition
🖋️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
How do you think the TikTok CEO handled his first congressional hearing?
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 👍 Given what he was up against, Mr Chew handled it like a pro (20%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
👎 His careful answers just raised more questions (73%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 🖋️ Other (write in!)  (7%)
Your two cents:
👎
S.C:
“Unfortunately those who grilled the CEO were utterly incompetent for the most part. As someone advocating in Europe for a ban, they did significant damage to the ban case here by asking bizarre questions, showing a complete lack of understanding of the risks, technology or its use as a hybrid weapon by China.”
🖋️
T.F:
“The US response to international competition is to sanction, ban or invade. These side shows are a tool to justify their inability to compete on a level playing field.”