URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/reduced-size-template-51ae9f251b8ac86c
Title: 🌍 The geopolitics of ads

Today’s briefing:
— The geopolitics of ads
— A wild plot in Venezuela
— They smuggled cigarettes
how
?!
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Today’s briefing on
the geopolitics of ads
finally gives me the excuse to share some of the funniest (if semi-apocryphal?) examples of brands that’ve failed spectacularly when translated into new markets and languages:
It’s hard to beat KFC’s
Finger-lickin’ good
ending up as
Eat your fingers off
in China
Mitsubishi wondered why its
Pajero
was selling so poorly in Latin America until someone pointed out it’s occasionally slang for
tosser
Tonic water
flopped in Italy until Schweppes learned it was selling as
toilet water
A US airline tried to boost Mexico sales with its
Fly in leather
campaign, only to learn the hard way it was slang for
fly naked
And Clairol’s
Mist Stick
curling iron bombed in Germany until locals pointed out
mist
is slang for
crap
.
Ahhhhhh good times. Let’s dive in?
Remembrance of the day
2 years
That’s how long has now passed since the deadly Hamas attacks on Israel triggered a devastating war. Hamas today (7 October) celebrated what it called a “
glorious day
”, while Israel has scheduled its own official mourning for 16 October (after the High Holidays).
Corporates and consumers
Sometimes when riding the subway to work, you just need to take a break from all the ads on your phone and really look up so you can, you know, see all the ads on the subway.
Sure, they’re trying to sell you the burrito at the front-end, the gym membership at the back-end, and the booze and gambling to numb any pain in between.
But if you mute the noise, there are also some
subtle signals
about who we are, who we trust, and which version of the world we want to believe in.
So grab that passport and join us for a quick trip ‘round the world, starting in…
Sweden, ja?
Countries are constantly hustling to rebrand themselves in hopes of carving out a bigger slice of that sweet sweet
tourism
market. But we’ve never quite seen
a campaign
like Sweden’s, pitching itself (with a wink) as the world’s first destination prescribed by doctors!
It’s a reference to Sweden’s famed saunas, ice baths, and wilderness, all now essential (and data-backed) routines for any 40-something who suddenly realised they’re mortal.
The deeper signals for our anxious and busy world?
As our lives get more synthetic, there’s a premium on anything
authentic
As our world gets more hectic, there’s a premium on anything
tranquil
, and
As Sweden’s neighbourhood grapples with Putin’s war, there’s a premium on emphasising at home and abroad that
Sweden still carries on
(even as Stockholm casually gives everyone a handy war preparedness
guide
).
The Swedes aren’t alone, of course: the Norwegians next door crushed it with
last year’s ad
highlighting Oslo’s calm, just as cities elsewhere were protesting against overtourism.
Anyway, let’s now head to…
Germany and Indonesia!
If you ever find yourself hopping on a flight from Germany to Indonesia, that’s wild given there are no direct flights. But itineraries aside, you’ll feel military vibes at each end.
Ubering to
Munich
airport, you’ll notice young Bundeswehr recruits smiling down from billboards, calling on citizens to
"Do something that really counts"
(ie, enlist)
.
Then once you land 10,000km (6,200mi) away in
Jakarta
, grab a copy of Indonesia’s biggest daily paper and you’ll see the president himself (Prabowo) just took out a full page ad defending his growing use of the military for random tasks — from school lunches and medicine-making, to agricultural projects and palm oil operations.
Prabowo even dusted off his inner Don Draper via a crisp new slogan —
No Longer Just Military: Indonesian-style People’s Defense.
The deeper signals for our rattled and gridlocked world?
As our democracies get more gridlocked, populists like Prabowo will increasingly wheel the military out to
get stuff done
(or be seen to do so), but…
The need to take out a full-page ad is a reminder that
folks won’t just swallow it
, particularly if they’re processing an authoritarian history. Speaking of which…
Germany’s recruitment campaign aims to
strike that balance
, responding to the realities of Putin’s aggression without playing into Putin’s anti-West propaganda.
Anyway, time for our ‘Murican Intriguers to head home to…
The US of A
Once you stagger through your front door and lunge for the Maxwell House coffee in your pantry, you’ll notice it just temporarily rebranded as
Maxwell
Apartment
in a marketing stunt appealing to anyone struggling in the US housing market.
And you can chuckle to yourself about it later while waiting in line for your McDonald’s $5 Meal Deal, wearing those new low-cost Old Navy basics, watching Netflix’s cheaper ad-supported service, or engaging with any of the other countless brands now refreshing their value offerings as US households report feeling the pinch.
And that concludes our (free) trip.
Intrigue’s Take
Let’s conclude with a couple of reflections on what these ads have in common, shall we?
First
, they’re all like a mirror reflecting
our own fears
back at us (then selling the cure). For Germans, the military’s ad reflects not only the obvious unease around Putin’s moves abroad, but also the youth’s aimlessness amid politico-economic uncertainty back home. For Indonesians, Prabowo’s ad hints at fears of an authoritarian reboot. And perhaps the Swedish ad’s emphasis on silence and tradition hints at how both are now under threat.
And second
, these ads all hint at
who we should trust
in response. For the Swedes? The answer is nature and science. The Indonesians and Germans lean a little more on the state. As for those US ads? Just leave it to the market, y’all.
Anyway, enjoy the burrito and gym membership. And now a smooth and shameless segue to remind you that if you’d ever like to advertise with Intrigue and reach ~145k+ intriguing inboxes every day, just smash that reply button!
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
Missiles, maybe
.
President Trump says he’s “
sort of made a decision
” on sending long-range Tomahawk missiles to Ukraine, though he wants a heads-up on Kyiv’s plans first. (
Kyiv Independent
)
Comment
: The bigger hurdle might not be any yes from the White House, but the fact the White House was just briefing journalists that its own stockpiles are already pre-committed. This could be accurate, or it could be misdirection aimed at Moscow.
🇫🇷
FRANCE
-
Another one bites
le
dust.
Sébastien Lecornu resigned as prime minister yesterday (Monday), less than a month after his appointment and just hours after announcing his cabinet, which faced intense backlash across the political spectrum. (
DW
)
Comment
: That’s three felled PMs in a row, including France’s two shortest-serving PMs in modern history (Barnier and now Lecornu). The continued gridlock benefits France’s populists, who’ll be the presumed beneficiaries as soon as President Macron calls another snap election (hence his repeated attempts to find new PMs first).
🇬🇧
UNITED KINGDOM
-
Pointing fingers
.
Downing Street is denying any role in the sensational collapse of a trial accusing two British nationals of spying for China. Interestingly, local outlets had suggested prosecutors dropped the case because UK officials declined to classify China as an “
enemy
” (per the original evidentiary standard). (
Politico
)
🇯🇵
JAPAN
-
Link up.
Rumour has it Tokyo is on the brink of signing a defence pact to supply Bangladesh with military kit and tech. (
Asia Times
)
Comment
: If true, it’d a) provide revenue to help finance Japan’s own defence ramp-up, b) cement Japan’s image as an alternative security partner to China, and c) partly offset rival China’s growing influence in Bangladesh.
🇸🇩
SUDAN
-
Convicted.
The International Criminal Court has convicted Ali Kushayb on 27 counts of war crimes and crimes against humanity for his role as a leader of Sudan’s infamous Janjaweed forces that ravaged Darfur from 2003 to 2020. (
Africa News
)
Comment
: The Janjaweed has now rebranded as the Rapid Support Forces, fighting Sudan’s military since 2023. It’s still facing allegations of atrocities, including in the same Darfur region where it’s now besieged the key city of Al Fashir for 500+ days.
🇻🇪
VENEZUELA
-
Just in time.
The Maduro regime says it’s reinforcing security around the (shuttered) US embassy in Caracas after thwarting an alleged false flag attack by local extremists on the US compound, purportedly aimed at provoking the US. (
Bloomberg
$)
Comment
: This feels a tad implausible, leaving us to wonder if it’s a) propaganda to portray Maduro as a magnanimous and vigilant protector, b) a smear against conservative opponents (whom he blamed) to justify another crackdown, or c) a bit of mutual posturing to deter any more US moves in the region.
🇳🇿
NEW ZEALAND
-
Sorry about that.
The Kiwis have compensated Samoa to the tune of $3.6M after a New Zealand naval ship ran aground on a Samoan reef before catching fire last year, leaving oil slicks on nearby beaches. (
BBC
)
Extra Intrigue
Here’s what people around the world are googling
Folks in the
🇦🇪
UAE
looked up ‘AMD stock’ after the US chipmaker unveiled a
multi-billion-dollar deal with OpenAI
.
🇦🇺
Australians
searched for ‘
Jilly Cooper
’ after news broke about the
famous British author’s death
.
And
🇮🇳
India’s
traders googled ‘
Tata Capital IPO
’, as the conglomerate’s consumer finance arm gears up for
India’s biggest IPO of the year
.
Snafu of the day
Many assumed Putin was (again) to blame when airborne objects temporarily closed yet another European airport on Sunday.
But this latest incident in Lithuania’s capital of Vilnius was actually caused by weather balloons carrying crates of smuggled cigarettes from Belarus! Turns out it’s quite common, with the Lithuanians recovering 544 such balloons just this year.
Today’s poll
Do you think President Trump will send Tomahawk missiles to Ukraine?
🚀 Yep, he's lost patience with Putin
👎 Nope, it's just more words
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think Takaichi can save Japan?
🚀
Yes, she's got what it takes (48%)
😩
No, Japan's challenges transcend any one leader (51%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (1%)
Your two cents:
😩
C.D:
“Success in this case is to build stability and stimulate the economy in the near term so that over the long haul successors have a solid foundation on which to build.”
✍️
T.W.L:
“Does Japan need saving?”
😩
W.H.H:
“No, she’ll effectively get nothing done except for putting more restrictions on foreigners due to the likely necessity of allying with Sanseito and have a career-ending scandal in a year or two as is tradition.”