URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/friday-e759
Title: 🌍 The best week of Erdoğan's life

IN TODAY’S EDITION
1️⃣ The best week of Erdoğan’s life
2️⃣ Intrigue’s weekend recommendations
3️⃣ Tree of the day
Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
During the Intrigue team’s appearance on 2WAY the other night, I was asked what was behind Putin’s decision to withdraw Russian troops from Syria last weekend... what did Putin see that others missed?
It’s just so tempting to see every decision as part of some master strategy in a game of real life risk, but the truth is that Putin was caught out by Assad’s downfall, and had no other choice. Every world leader, including Putin, puts their pants on one leg at a time, just like the rest of us.
Keep the spirit of that thought in mind, if not the mental image, as you read our main story looking at Turkey’s recent geopolitical wins, because they make Erdogan appear like he’s playing 4D chess while everyone else is at the kiddie table eating crayons.
THE HEADLINES
China’s policymakers promise more stimulus.
At China’s
Central Economic Work Conference
, which sets the
economic agenda for the coming year
, top officials pledged more spending, higher borrowing, and lower interest rates to support the world’s second-largest economy, as growth continues to underwhelm.
Trump invites Xi Jinping to inauguration.
Breaking with convention, Donald Trump has
invited various world leaders
to attend his January inauguration. President Xi has apparently declined — it’s hard to imagine China’s leader paying homage to the US right now. Meanwhile, Trump has
tweeted
that, after meeting with the main US dockworkers union, he opposes port automation.
Macron to announce new PM today.
The French president was expected to name a replacement for Michel Barnier yesterday, but instead says he’ll
make his decision today
(Friday). Rumour has it he wants an alliance with the centre-left after his last short-lived government was toppled by the right, though the various names currently doing the rounds include fellow centrists.
Myanmar junta loses border with Bangladesh.
Myanmar’s military has now
lost control of its entire 270km
(170mi) border with Bangladesh after fierce fighting with insurgents. It’s yet another setback for the ruling junta whose 2021 coup tipped the country into an ongoing civil war.
UK economy shrinks unexpectedly.
Britain’s GDP shrank by 0.1% in October, taking many by surprise and adding to the new-ish Labour government’s woes. We looked at some of the UK’s challenges
yesterday
.
TOP STORY
Why Erdoğan is having the best week of his life
You can’t fake that smile.
You might be having a great week, but nobody’s having a better time than Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan. No he didn’t just fall in love, climb a mountain, or watch C-beams glitter in the dark near the Tannhäuser Gate. At least, not as far as we know?
Rather, in just a few days, Erdoğan has:
Helped eject rival autocrats from a neighbour (Syria)
Restored Turkey’s influence over what was long part of its Ottoman empire, and
Reasserted Turkey’s role as a major player by brokering peace in Africa.
Let’s get into it.
Syria
We’ve
written briefly
about Erdoğan’s role in Assad’s fall next door, but it’s a cracker.
Ties were never easy, but like almost everyone else in the region appalled by Assad gassing and barrel-bombing his own people during the civil war, Erdoğan cut ties.
His
spooks
already knew many opposition players operating just over his 900km (560mi) border with Syria, so Erdoğan built on those ties as emerging groups seized Syria’s border crossings. One ended up being the Islamist
Hayat Tahrir al-Sham
(HTS), which led last week’s
march on Damascus
.
While Turkey denies any direct role in Assad’s ousting (and still lists HTS as terrorists), it wouldn’t and couldn’t have happened without
Erdoğan’s nod
. In fact, he eventually stopped pretending and just openly egged it on, sending his spy chief on
a personal tour
around Damascus with none other than the HTS leader himself (Golani).
So Erdoğan now has direct
access and influence in Damascus
. The question is what he’ll do with it. Sure, he’ll want help repatriating the three million Syrian refugees in Turkey, but he’ll also want HTS to turn a blind eye while he keeps hitting Kurdish groups, some with ties to the PKK (listed as a terrorist group in Turkey, the US, and elsewhere) — he wants a buffer along his border.
But that puts Erdoğan at odds with his NATO ally
the US
, which still has 900 troops in Syria helping those same Kurdish groups contain ISIS (including
tens of thousands
of detained ISIS members). Erdoğan doesn’t want an ISIS resurgence either.
So what’s next?
That’ll partly depend on
Trump
, who’s
tweeted
his preference to stay out of it (an instinct Erdoğan will encourage). But there are
influential voices
in DC
who back an autonomous Kurdish region, or at least oppose the notion of the US (again) abandoning its Kurdish allies.
Somalia and Ethiopia
While all this was playing out, Erdoğan somehow also stepped out on stage before international media in Ankara yesterday (Thursday), hand in hand with
Somali
leader Hassan Sheikh Mohamud and his
Ethiopian
counterpart Abiy Ahmed. Why? To announce he’d just
brokered a truce
between the two feuding neighbours in the Horn of Africa.
Part of the issue flared up in January when Ethiopia (the world’s most populous landlocked nation) inked a deal with neighbouring
Somaliland
, a self-ruling coastal strip Somalia claims as its own — the deal would’ve granted Ethiopia a base on the Gulf of Aden in return for potentially recognising Somaliland as a country. But of course, that irked
Somalia
. There are no major new details in this truce, but all three leaders now say they’re figuring out a way for Ethiopia to get sea access without undermining Somalia.
The broader message here is that where traditional Western powers can’t or won’t impose a solution, Turkey will.
Why are we telling you all this?
We often bang on about this emerging new multipolar world of ours, but it’s not often you get decades of evidence jammed into a single week of wins by one of the most intriguing resurgent players, Turkey.
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
The missing nuance in the public narrative is that Erdoğan’s luck can still change on a dime: he’s accumulating resentment with each new fake-out, and just stiffed two major players (Iran and Russia) by helping boot them out of Syria, despite years of talks.
But he’s well placed to handle whatever comes next. Why? Here are just two reasons:
First
, he’s now got the world’s
third-largest diplomatic network
after years of quiet but rapid growth. That eventually pays a dividend, whether you want to topple a dictator or broker a truce.
But
second
, it’s about the mission you set those diplomats and the political cover you give them. Erdoğan has a clear and assertive vision of Turkey’s place on the world stage, and his diplomats push it hard wherever they are. In contrast, many Western diplomats often seem scared of getting in trouble with their home governments, which are still debating what vision to even pursue.
The reality is, Erdoğan knows from bitter experience that if you don’t shape the world in your own image, others will shape it in theirs.
Also worth noting:
Turkey’s largest overseas military base is in Somalia, established in 2017 after several years of Turkish humanitarian presence.
Erdoğan reportedly just made the world’s first
diplomatic appointment
to post-Assad Syria. Meanwhile, Donald Trump has
nominated
his long-time backer and real estate investment mogul Tom Barrack as his ambassador to Turkey.
Intrigue’s very own John, Helen, and Jeremy just got together for a chat about Syria, the region, and what comes next - it’ll be available
here
later today.
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇹🇼
Taiwan
: Taipei has now
shut down its temporary emergency response centre
, citing the end of China’s latest offshore military drills. Meanwhile, China has brushed off criticism of the drills, citing a quote from ancient military strategist Sun Tzu: “
just as water retains no constant shape, so in warfare there are no constant conditions.
"
🇪🇺
EU
: As we foreshadowed yesterday, the European Central Bank has
cut interest rates by a quarter-point
to 3%, though it’s declined to pre-commit to any particular rate path for next year. EU policymakers now seem more worried about low growth as inflation cools.
🇲🇾
Malaysia
: Kuala Lumpur has
opened a national AI office
, aimed at ensuring every segment of society enjoys the tech’s benefits. In launching the initiative, Malaysia’s digital minister invited citizens to "
imagine a country where AI helps fishermen pinpoint the best fishing spots”
, and “
farmers get to optimize land use
".
🇵🇾
Paraguay
: Asunción has
reopened its embassy in Jerusalem
, joining Honduras, Guatemala, Kosovo, PNG, and the US in recognising the city as Israel’s capital. Most countries run their embassies out of Tel Aviv amid overlapping Israeli-Palestinian claims to Jerusalem.
🇿🇲
Zambia
: The African Development Bank has
approved a $108M loan to Zambia
to help boost revenue and diversify the economy through initiatives like agricultural mechanisation. Drought-hit Zambia is also set to receive around
$185.5M from the IMF
, subject to board approval.
Join us in satisfying growing energy demands.
Klondike Royalties
provides an opportunity to invest in the North Block of the Kitchen Lights Unit in Alaska's Cook Inlet, estimated to contain 300 million barrels of recoverable reserves. Our royalty-based investment model is backed by a team with 4 previous successful projects.
Get Started
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Weekend recommendations from Team Intrigue
Bake
your first batch of holiday cookies — we suggest the
NYT’s Iced Peppermint
variety for both aesthetic and taste reasons.
Watch
Black Doves
, a new action-packed spy series starring Keira Knightley (no, it’s not set in the 1800s).
Read
why
some believe Giorgia Meloni is now Europe’s
most
influential
person
.
TREE OF THE DAY
This year’s Christmas tree in London’s Trafalgar Square. Credits: @trafalgartree on X.
Londoners are dissing this year’s Christmas tree in Trafalgar Square, tossing around spicy adjectives like
“scrawny”
and
“half dead.”
But many folks don’t seem to realise the tree is actually a gift from the city of Oslo in allied Norway. Awkward…
You see, Oslo has been sending a tree to London since 1947 to say thanks for helping during WWII. This year’s tree, the 77th, hails from Grefsenkleiva, just north of downtown Oslo. It’s nearly 20 meters (65ft) high, and is decorated with traditional strings and lights.
So how has Oslo responded to all this shade? The tree’s
X account
, which has been around since 2012, is defending its honour in the best (and maybe only?) way possible: with a seemingly endless pipeline of tree-mendous puns.
FRIDAY QUIZ
It’s Republic Day in the Mediterranean island nation of Malta!
What year did Malta become a republic?
1507
1974
1806
1774
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Who ruled Malta before it became a republic?
The UK
Algeria
France
The Ottomans
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
What is Malta's capital?
City of Malta
Cospicua
Sicily
Valletta
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Was this forwarded to you? We're a team of ex-diplomats producing a concise and engaging geopolitical briefing for 100k+ leaders each day.
It’s free to subscribe
.