URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/the-central-bank-war-of-independence-2b1320cc62330a90
Title: 🌍 The central bank war of independence

Today’s briefing:
— The central bank war of independence
— The Intrigue jobs board
Supported by
Good morning  {{first_name  | Intriguer}}
. It’s hard to succinctly capture the #vibes coming out of Washington DC these days, but someone’s gotta do it. That someone, dear Intriguers, is me.
I heard a gem just yesterday, which went something along the lines of: “
the only thing making me feel secure about my job right now is that Jerome Powell currently has the same job insecurity as me.
” (with credit to a DC-based friend of Intrigue's)
Spare a thought for Jay as we dive into today’s top story on
the Fed
and other central banks around the world as they grapple with
increasing political pressures
.
P.S.
Don’t miss Intrigue’s
special Earth Day report
with our friends at Sightline Climate, featuring 5 energy tech predictions for the year ahead —
get it in your inbox here
!
Bank on it
US stocks and the US dollar plunged again on Monday after the president
colourfully
called on Jerome Powell, the Fed Chair, to cut rates.
Trump
’s argument is that, with prices dropping, Powell should make “
pre-emptive cuts
” to avoid any economic slowdown, but…
Powell
has already signalled he’s in no rush to cut rates given the risk Trump’s tariffs will just lead to another inflationary spike.
Anyway, while this monetary soap opera plays out on the world stage, it’s reignited a debate that everyone thought was resolved decades ago: the notion that
central banks must be independent from politics
.
Why?
The basic argument is independence enables the Fed to do its job (tame inflation while supporting growth) in a way that’s:
a) Based on evidence rather than politics
b) Focused on long-term stability rather than short-term politics, and
c) Good for markets, who can stop fearing government interference.
And while
central bankers have their critics
(labelling them elite, opaque, unelected, unaccountable), this is now more than just a Twitter argument: decades of data suggest greater central bank independence leads to lower long-term inflation.
But of course, that’s
irritating for world leaders
who might hold the nuclear codes, yet not the simple ability to cut rates, or even fire the person who can (but won’t). In Trump’s case, that irritation will be heightened by the fact Powell is a Trump 1.0 hire.
And yet when world leaders voice their irritation, that can
wrongfoot central bank chiefs
who might've otherwise reached their own independent decision to cut rates:
The mere perception of caving to political pressure can erode market confidence in a central bank’s commitment to its core mission, and…
Those doubts can quickly flow into higher inflation expectations and lower stock values, as investors sniff risk ahead.
So arguably, the act of even starting a debate around central bank independence means losing it, like some monetary version of
Godwin’s Law
.
Intrigue’s Take
Just like for high-schoolers, reputation is
everything
for central bankers. Lose it and you’ve really gotta switch schools. Just ask Turkey’s…
Murat Çetinkaya (2016-19), who obediently kept rates low but fed
inflation
Murat Uysal (2019-20), who obediently hosed billions defending the
lira
, or
Şahap Kavcıoğlu (2021-23), who obediently cut rates and worsened
both
.
Erdogan booted each as they changed course, but he’s still grappling with inflation, a weak lira, and a persistent cost of living crisis. And that’s because
the core problem
was never any single central bank chief, but rather their collective and cumulative loss of credibility, driven by their collective and cumulative obedience to Erdogan himself.
Compare them all to (say) the European Central Bank’s then-chief
Mario Draghi
, who had built up so much technical and institutional cred, he effectively just had to utter three words (“
whatever it takes
”) to single-handedly end the historic euro crisis.
But it’d be wrong to suggest
central bank credibility
therefore rests on democracy: even the banks in Xi’s China and hybrid Singapore, for example, variously enjoy credibility based not so much on any formal independence, but on their competence.
Rather, the divide here is less about regime type, and more about whether citizens (and thus markets) fundamentally
trust
their authorities. And as the US Fed has necessarily gotten more creative and expansive in its response to each new crisis (the alphabet soup of examples includes TALF, MSLP, RRP, BTFP), it’s stretching popular understanding, which strains popular trust, which in turn invites populist criticism.
But ultimately, the problem in our view is not so much how the Fed responds to each new crisis, but rather
why these crises keep coming
— and that’s really a question for the politicians (of all stripes), and the folks electing them (us).
Sound even smarter:
Some nations have tackled the above challenges by just
abolishing their central banks altogether
, effectively outsourcing their monetary policy (and thus credibility) to the US Fed by adopting the US dollar. Panama and Ecuador are two prominent examples, with Argentina’s Javier Milei famously pledging to follow suit in Argentina.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
Cytonics.
Big Pharma walked away from osteoarthritis.
Cytonics is running toward it. Our mission: develop a disease-modifying therapy that may finally treat the root cause of OA. With over 10,000 patients already treated using our first-gen technology and a novel biologic now in human trials, we’re aiming to rewrite the rules of joint health—without Wall Street or VC funding. Join over 6,000 everyday investors who are backing biotech’s boldest underdog.
Invest Now
!
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES — US floats recognising Crimea as Russian.
The US is reportedly pushing European and Ukrainian counterparts to accept a ‘final offer’ featuring US recognition of Russia’s annexation of Crimea and the withdrawal of sanctions, in exchange for a freezing of the frontlines. (
WSJ
)
Comment:
That looks like a sweet deal for Putin, who already needs to freeze the conflict and replenish his lines anyway. It arguably reflects Trump’s waning patience with the whole peace process, which might’ve been Putin’s hope all along — the US leaving the chessboard doesn't mean the game stops.
🇻🇦
VATICAN CITY — Pope’s funeral to be held Saturday.
Planned attendees include world leaders like Donald Trump, Brazil’s Lula da Silva, and Ukraine’s Zelensky. (
Vatican News
)
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES — Musk to step back from government role.
Elon Musk has said he’ll significantly step back from his Trump advisory role, instead allocating more time to his EV-maker, Tesla. His announcement comes after another disappointing Tesla quarterly earnings update. (
BBC
)
🇨🇷
COSTA RICA — San Jose grants US deportees 3-month permits.
Following a human rights lawsuit, Costa Rica’s new permits release US deportees from detention, though it’s unclear what their next move might be: hailing from various third countries, they have no work rights and many lack passports.
(
AP
)
🇲🇲
MYANMAR — Junta extends ceasefire.
The ruling military junta is citing earthquake relief in justifying its ceasefire with rival ethnic militias, though it kept attacking in the immediate quake aftermath, and there are reports it never fully stopped.
(
The Straits Times
)
Comment:
There’s long been criticism of the (in)effectiveness of the main regional bloc (ASEAN), so it’s interesting to see this ceasefire extension might be the result of rare junta talks spearheaded by Malaysia’s prime minister (ASEAN’s current chair).
🇪🇸
SPAIN
— Madrid accelerates 2% NATO target.
Spain, long NATO’s lowest defence spender but now the eurozone’s fastest-growing economy, is committing to hit NATO’s 2% spending target by the end of the year — that speeds up a goal it was only set to hit in 2029. Why? PM Sanchez is citing a "
rapidly evolving geopolitical and economic context
." (
Politico EU
)
🇮🇳
INDIA — Kashmir terrorist attack kills 26+ tourists.
An offshoot of Lashkar-e-Taiba (the Pakistan-based jihadist group) is claiming responsibility for the shooting at a resort in an Indian-controlled (and Pakistan-claimed) part of Kashmir.
(
CBS
)
Comment:
An Indian military response against targets in Pakistan now feels inevitable — and that’s a reminder how, while headlines focus on any risk of conflict between nuclear powers like the US, China, and/or Russia, a clash between nuclear-armed India and Pakistan could still be the more immediate risk.
🇬🇭
GHANA — West African leaders gather after region splits.
Leaders from West Africa’s main regional bloc (the Economic Community of West African States, or ECOWAS) are now in Ghana to figure out next steps, after the junta-led trio of Niger, Mali, and Burkina Faso all bailed earlier this year.
(
Africanews
)
Comment:
In case anyone needed a reminder of the link between trade and politics, one of the junta trio’s first moves was to slap a tariff on ECOWAS goods.
Extra Intrigue
💼
The Intrigue jobs board
Government Affairs Director
@
Wiz
in Washington, D.C.
Arbitration Intern
@
International Chamber of Commerce
in Abu Dhabi
Social Impact Partnerships Lead
@
Anthropic
in the US
Digital Strategist
@
Open Society
in Mexico City
Your two cents
Do you see a real risk of the Fed losing its independence?
👉 Yes, President Trump has been clear
🥱 No, it's all just posturing
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
What do you think will be the main geopolitical legacy of Pope Francis?
☮️ His calls for peace (21%)
🏚️ His focus on poverty (54%)
🏞️ His work on the environment (10%)
🇨🇳
His deal with China (9%)
✍️ Other (write us!) (5%)
Your comments:
🏚️
C.D:
“We're hearing from many impoverished or marginalised people that they feel they have lost their Pope, their advocate.”
☮️
J.M:
“His ability to think small in the moment: he's called the only Gazan Catholic Church every evening at 7pm since the bombings began, merely to check in.”
✍️
D.D:
“Despite their fame, popes are pretty inconsequential in today's world in terms of measurable changes.”
✍️
C.M:
“The difference was he focused on all of the above.”