URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/they-looted-an-indonesian-minister-s-home
Title: 🌍 They looted an Indonesian minister’s home

Today’s briefing:
— They looted the finance minister’s home
— Brazil fines who?
— Redheads, unite!
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. There’s a developing country’s airline where literally the only difference between flying coach and business class is that, up in the expensive pointy end of the plane, they give you a single Ferrero Rocher for take-off. One.
World’s most expensive orb of velvety chocolate and crisp hazelnut? Surely. I mean, you could just bring your own box of Ferreros and enjoy them by the fistful back in coach, then still have change left for the taxi once you land.
But of course, that’d be missing the point, wouldn’t it? The extra $600 isn’t for a Ferrero or a marginally quicker disembark. Rather, it’s for that sweet sweet feeling that only comes by sitting with others who can also afford the extra $600. And you can’t put a price on that, can you? (Yes, it’s $600.)
Anyway, let’s get you up to speed on
a wild weekend in Indonesia
.
Number of the day
$142B
That’s how much tariff revenue the US has collected so far this fiscal year (Oct 24 - Sept 25), against a growing ~$6 trillion in expenditure. The Trump Administration is expected to appeal Friday’s court ruling that found the president did not have legal authority to impose most tariffs, which will remain in place until at least mid-October.
Unrest in Indonesia
Well
that
escalated quickly. A residence belonging to Indonesia's market darling of a finance minister (Sri Mulyani Indrawati) got
ransacked
outside Jakarta early yesterday (Sunday) morning. So let's kick off the week with a quick but important question:
what?!
This all ✌️started✌️ last Monday, after local outlets reported all 580 members of Indonesia's parliament are now getting
a monthly housing allowance
worth a cool $3k (almost 10x the monthly minimum wage).
Those rules hit last year, but it was bad timing for the
juicy details
to now hit the headlines, right as regular folks feel the pinch of low wages, high inflation, and lay-offs.
So Indonesia's students and unions fired up with some big protests until Thursday, when…
First
, footage went viral of an armoured police van
hitting a young ride-hail moto-driver
, leaving the poor guy dead. For a tired and angry nation, it was yet another (shocking) case of the little guy trying to do his job, only to get screwed by The Man.
And just as that outrage was bubbling towards an out-of-touch ruling class...
Second
, parliamentarian Ahmad Sahroni helpfully entered centre-stage and called protestors “
the stupidest people in the world
” for demanding the legislature be dissolved.
It's those two things that really set the whole saga off from Thursday: Sahroni (of “
you idiots
” fame) then got his house ransacked, while Indonesia's street clashes got more violent and more widespread, with
regional parliament buildings ending up ablaze
.
By the time the finance minister's house (Indrawati) was ransacked Sunday morning, any parliamentary perk anger had morphed into
something way bigger
, hence our above sassy air quotes around when this all ✌️started✌️: sure, folks want those perks gone, but they’re also now demanding higher minimum wages, fairer taxes, stronger anti-corruption rules, justice for past atrocities, and even the removal of the President (Prabowo) himself.
So speaking of Prabowo... how's he handling all this?
As the chaos escalated, his office cited (ahem) “
domestic dynamics
” Saturday night in announcing he was cancelling his planned trip to join Xi Jinping, Vladimir Putin, Narendra Modi and others at Beijing's WWII Victory Day celebrations this Wednesday.
Then after the looting of his finance minister's property, Prabowo himself emerged later yesterday (Sunday) hoping a mix of carrots and sticks might finally end the upheaval:
Carrots
in the form of a promise to reverse the perks (plus hold those police responsible for the ride-hail driver’s death), and
Sticks
in the form of orders for officers to get tough against rioters and looters (he also sprinkled in the words “
terrorists
” and “
treason
” for good measure).
So... did any of this work?
Maybe
: several protest leaders have just delayed demonstrations planned for today (Monday), not because they’re happy, but because Prabowo’s tightening web of city checkpoints will make further protests “
impossible
” for now.
Intrigue’s Take
So... why should the broader world care about this?
First
, it's the world's third-largest democracy, fourth-most populous country, and Southeast Asia's single
largest economy
. And the 1990s
Asian Financial Crisis
was a reminder how quickly a regional butterfly's wings can trigger a hurricane elsewhere.
Second
, Indonesia is a key swing state amid the kind of
US-China rivalry
that’ll shape the next century, and yet Prabowo cancelling his big Beijing trip is a reminder how easily Indonesia's heft can (again) be withdrawn to stamp out fires back home.
Third
, speaking of back home, this all gives spooky echoes of Indonesia's
darker days
under the late dictator, Suharto, who happened to be the ex father-in-law to today’s president Prabowo, who still denies committing atrocities as Suharto’s special forces chief.
Fourth
, there are also some
futuristic
echoes in the way China’s
TikTok
has “
voluntarily
” suspended services folks were using to track the protests. TikTok execs wouldn’t want angry local regulators to again ban the platform in its biggest market (alongside the US).
And
fifth
, the mayhem has indeed
spooked markets
, with investors pulling enough cash to send both the rupiah and Indonesia's main equities index down. But for the finance minister herself to get caught up in this? A little poetic: her stellar market reputation as a former IMF big-wig was already in doubt after she rubber-stamped Prabowo's odd fiscal plans earlier this year. But if
she
isn't safe from all this chaos, investors will wonder who is.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇦🇫
AFGHANISTAN
-
Hundreds killed in quake.
A shallow earthquake in eastern Afghanistan has left at least 600 dead overnight, with the mountainous terrain likely to further complicate rescue efforts. (
Al Jazeera
)
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
All Eyez on Me.
President Xi has welcomed Russia’s Vladimir Putin, India’s Narendra Modi, and ~20 other regional leaders to Tianjin for this week’s Shanghai Cooperation Organization summit, ahead of Xi’s big WWII
Victory Day
parade on Wednesday. (
NYT
$)
Comment:
This summit has been in the works for months, but the timing and optics all now play neatly in Xi’s favour: amid US tariffs and other moves, world leaders are now gathering around Xi. Indian outlets are channelling a real sense of national betrayal over US tariffs, but once these photo opps are over, Modi still faces a choice between his $17B windfall buying cheap Russian oil, or the $37B cost of US tariffs.
🇺🇦
UKRAINE
-
Suspect arrested.
President Zelensky says authorities have arrested a suspect in connection with Saturday’s assassination of former parliamentary speaker Andriy Parubiy, a leading pro-West voice in the 2014 Maidan protests. Meanwhile, Ukraine ended August notching up a dozen or so hits on Russian energy infrastructure, disrupting an estimated 17% of Russia’s total refining capacity. (
Kyiv Independent
)
🇬🇱
GREENLAND
-
On your side.
France’s foreign minister was in Greenland over the weekend, voicing solidarity with Denmark and its autonomous territory amid reports US officials were there trying to identify Greenlanders sympathetic to anti-Denmark rhetoric. (
Barron’s
)
Comment:
The visit came just after Denmark’s prime minister (Frederiksen) delivered a long-awaited apology over a decades-long involuntary birth control campaign impacting indigenous Greenlandic women and girls.
🇧🇷
BRAZIL
-
You’re fined.
A Brazilian labour court has fined German automaker Volkswagen ~$30M over slave-like working conditions at an Amazonian farm (owned via a subsidiary) from 1974 to 1986. (
ABC
)
Comment:
VW says it’s appealing the fine, reportedly Brazil’s largest reparation order in history.
🇵🇭
PHILIPPINES
-
Delegation in town.
Beijing is warning Manila not to “
play with fire
”, amid reports the Philippines just hosted a visit by Taiwan’s foreign minister (leading a delegation of investors). (
AP
)
Comment:
Two-pronged messaging at play here: hosting Taiwan’s foreign minister is always a show of defiance against the country (China) claiming Taiwan as its own. But refusing to acknowledge the visit in public (while downplaying the visit in private) is also a reminder how much capitals still avoid directly poking Beijing in the eye.
🇾🇪
YEMEN
-
Leadership strike.
Houthi forces have raided local UN offices after an Israeli airstrike killed the Iran-backed group’s prime minister and other reps. (
Al Jazeera
)
Comment:
This prime minister was more of a figurehead, with the group’s actual leader still Abdul Malik al-Houthi (the founder’s brother) — they’re vowing revenge.
Extra Intrigue
🤣
Your weekly roundup of the world’s lighter news
Some Japanese companies are showing sad movies to employees and
paying a man to wipe away their tears
as part of a corporate bonding exercise.
The Kiwi government has spent ~$6M to repair the country’s national war memorial bells, only to then
fire the one guy who knows how to play them
.
Turkey’s transport minister has proved you can be
too much
of a brown-noser, after
his viral #TurkeyAccelerates video
of listening to presidential speeches in his car earned him a fine (turns out he was doing double the limit).
Thousands of redheads
from 80 or more countries have gathered in the Netherlands for an annual festival celebrating their flaming strands.
And Emirates has revealed the airline’s most
caviar-eating routes
, with Dubai-London on top, followed by Dubai-Paris and Dubai-Sydney.
Today’s poll
What do you think about the Xi, Putin, and Modi meeting in China this week?
📸 It's just a photo opp
🤝 They're re-aligning against US pressure
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Last Wednesday’s poll:
What Chinese stock would you buy?
🎎
Pop Mart (11%)
💻
DeepSeek (26%)
🍪
Hua Hong Semiconductor (40%)
🏪
JD.Com (5%)
🔱
Laopu Gold (9%)
✍️
Other (write us!) (9%)
Your two cents:
🍪
I.B:
“AI and robotics will be as transformational to the economy as the internet. China knows it, and US chip controls only highlighted the need to secure and invest in domestic production.”
🎎
E.K.H:
“I think this trend has a little left in it before it goes the way of the Beanie Baby.”
🔱
H.L:
“Gold is always a solid choice.”
✍️H.H:
“I wish none was an option. Too much geopolitical risk for me.”