URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/they-re-blowing-up-all-the-tankers-20ff43cdf0655fe4
Title: 🌍 They’re blowing up all the tankers

Today’s briefing:
— They’re blowing up all the tankers
— Beware the lovebugs
—
Who
might tax the rich?!
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Intrigue’s readers are the breed who know their Khomeneis from their Khameneis — we’re talking CEOs, diplomats, lawyers, investors, and super smart folks who want to understand the world.
But you didn’t think that was an unsolicited compliment did you? So here’s the solicitation: if you or your organisation want to partner with us to get your brand or message in front of our exceptionally high quality audience, I’d love to talk to you.
We offer excellent rates, engagement numbers that’ll knock your socks off, and the chance to align with one of the few media brands that people actually trust (and forward to their friends).
Best of all, you’ll be investing in the future of International Intrigue and helping us keep this show on the road. Interested? Hit reply and let’s chat about helping you hit your goals.
Speaking of hitting goals, our goal today is to get you all briefed on
a series of mysterious ship explosions
, and we intend to hit it!
PS
- This is our last briefing for the week, but we’ll be
back in your inbox from Monday!
Captain, beware!
While the world focuses on nukes and big beautiful bills and Diddy, another story has been simmering quietly in the background: by our count, there’ve now been at least five intriguing ship explosions this year, with the latest being the Greek-owned Vilamoura off the coast of Libya last week — its engine room got flooded, but there were no injuries.
For one ship to spontaneously blow up might be misfortune. Two? Carelessness. But five?! Oscar Wilde didn’t even leave us with a word for that, so allow us to tap in with ‘
fishy
’.
Particularly when you realise they all had indications someone might’ve used
limpet mines
— that’s the one you quietly attach to a ship, then escape into the sunset with your paramour on an all-mahogany Riva boat while a rousing strings score swells.
And while this stuff isn’t knocking the big stories off the frontpages, we can tell you shipping executives are absolutely popping. So what are the theories here?
Ukraine?
All five vessels had recently docked in
Russian ports
, prompting the inevitable theory that maybe Ukraine’s security services are now targeting Russia’s
shadow fleet
— the opaque network of vessels with obscure ownership helping Putin export his sanctioned oil.
Ukrainian
intelligence
hasn’t claimed responsibility, but it has a mixed record of doing so, and it did label the Vilamoura part of Russia’s stealthy shipping network just last week.
It also
just makes sense
: Putin finances his invasion via oil sales, and years of Western sanctions aren’t yet having the full bite. But when Ukraine started slapping its own sanctions (ie, slamming dozens of Putin’s terminals with drones) there were rumours the US asked Kyiv to cool it given the market mayhem and parallel peace talks.
So
maybe
the Ukrainians are now
hitting Putin’s ships instead
, sending a message to every shadowy owner: sure, you might score some easy cash, or you might lose it all.
That’d be on brand for President Zelensky, who’s not afraid to hit back abroad, whether:
The assassination of Lieutenant General Igor Kirillov in Moscow, or
Ukraine’s alleged role in destroying Nordstream 2, or even…
Sending Ukrainian special forces against Russian mercenaries in Africa.
The common thread is imposing costs on Putin for his invasion of Ukraine.
But not everyone’s convinced
:
At least three of the ships were carrying Kazakh (not Russian) oil when hit, and
The explosions have hit in different ways and at different moments (port vs sea).
And another thing —
where’d this all happen?
The five ships include…
Seacharm
(Jan 15) – Hit off the coast of Turkey
Koala
(Feb 9) – While docked at Russia’s Ust-Luga port
Seajewel
(Feb 15) – Struck near Italy, not too far from Libya
Grace Ferrum
(Feb) – Damaged off Libya
Vilamoura
(June 27) – Flooded near Libya after an engine room blast
So another possible common ingredient is…
Libya?
Four of the five ships had stopped in Libyan ports, and all had a habit of anchoring near Malta — both destinations are
known hotspots
for shadowy shipping activity.
But while there are all kinds of players exploiting Libya’s power vacuum right now (including Libya’s own factions) — and sure, the waters off Malta are open to intrigue — this possible geographic link might reveal less about
who
dunnit, and more about
how:
ie, perhaps via operatives working out of Malta or Libya. So then…
whodunnit?
Someone else?
We’re wandering way off into speculation territory here, but are there others who might have the will and the way to disrupt global oil markets?
Take your pick!
Iran
, for example, has a history of similar maritime sabotage — there’s widespread suspicion it was behind limpet mine attacks near Hormuz back in 2019, for example.
Why would it do that?
Perhaps to disrupt global oil flows and thereby pressure President Trump to re-engage and unshackle Iran’s oil reserves. Though it’s unclear why Iran would hit ships connected to a backer like Russia, unless the idea is to maximise deniability, and/or to disrupt
Kazakh
oil as a rival to Iranian wells? But again, this is pure speculation.
Ditto, we could get creative and speculate why any number of other players could theoretically benefit here. But we just don’t know. And that’s maybe even more unsettling.
Intrigue’s Take
Ol’ Vova must’ve thought he was pretty clever spinning up a fleet of leaky shadow vessels to keep his oil business afloat. But it turns out anyone can play in the shadows, and our best guess is we’re seeing
Ukraine’s security services
now making that clear. Why?
The motives align, but also the use of low-yield limpets suggests the perpetrators wanted to avoid the kind of global backlash that’d erupt if there were major spills or deaths.
As for the
Kazakh oil factor?
Maybe the intelligence was wrong. Or maybe, given the Kazakhs share oil export infrastructure with Russia, or the reports of illegal ship-to-ship transfers near Novorossiysk, perhaps Ukraine’s intel knows something we don’t.
Another thing?
It’s a reminder that, while Libya’s ongoing anarchy might not impact us directly, it still all wedges open space via which others might indeed hurt us. That’s why pulling up the drawbridge, while always seductive, is rarely effective.
So again, we just don’t know. Welcome to our new multipolar world, Intriguer.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
The Hustle
The Hustle is on a mission to deliver the best business-tech daily by focusing on what actually matters: growth, trends, and innovation. Unlike other news sources that bog you down with negativity, The Hustle keeps things fun and engaging while delivering the insights you need to stay ahead. Join over 2 million readers who start their morning with a quick 5-minute read that cuts through the noise and highlights the stories that impact your business and career.
Sign up free today
and discover why so many professionals trust The Hustle.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
More power!!!
OpenAI has signed a $30B p/year agreement with Oracle to rent ~4.5 gigawatts of data centre power in the US to power its future growth. (
DCD
)
Comment:
Need some context? The average nuclear reactor is one gigawatt.
🇺🇦
UKRAINE
-
Halt. Give way.
The US has announced it’s halting an arms shipment to Ukraine, citing concerns about its own stockpiles. The halt reportedly includes Patriot interceptors. (
NBC
)
Comment:
The timing couldn’t be worse, as Putin leans on hitting Ukrainian cities from afar as his ground campaign grinds to a crawl. It’s also just days after President Trump flagged he’d investigate the possibility of resuming Patriot sales to Ukraine.
🇻🇳
VIETNAM
-
Deal’s a deal.
After weeks of talks, President Trump has announced a trade deal with Vietnam including a 20% tariff on Vietnamese imports (down from the
Liberation Day
46%
)
and a 40% rate on transhipment (i.e. goods originating from China). (
CNBC
)
Comment
: The White House is trying to walk the line between keeping swing players like Vietnam onside (or at least not offside), while stopping a rival like China from rerouting exports via those same swing players to evade US tariffs.
🇮🇷
IRAN
-
Suspended sentence.
The Iranian president has signed into law a suspension of cooperation with the UN’s nuclear watchdog, following last month’s Israeli and US strikes on Iranian nuclear facilities. (
Al Jazeera
)
Comment
: You could argue this just formalises what was already happening — those US and Israeli strikes came after the UN watchdog dropped a report querying Iran’s 60% enriched uranium (20-30x any civilian need), plus its pattern of undeclared activities, which all ramped up after the US withdrew from the JCPOA in 2018. Still, Iran might see this procedural step backwards as a source of leverage in any future talks. A commitment to cooperate is one thing. Actual cooperation is another.
🇨🇭
SWITZERLAND
-
Tax the rich.
Swiss citizens will head to the polls in November to decide whether they’ll impose a 50% tax on inheritance and gifts above $56M, in a country long known for its welcoming vibes towards the ultra-rich. Both the government and legislature oppose the idea, but it’s got enough signatures for a plebiscite. (
SWI
)
🇸🇻
EL SALVADOR
-
Fashion is political.
President Bukele has criticised a Paris Fashion Week show featuring shaved-head models resembling prisoners, which Bukele took as a dig at his supermax facility for gang members and US deportees. Bukele threatened to “
ship them all to Paris
”, while the Mexican-American designer (who initially welcomed the publicity) said the message was about dehumanisation of people around the world. (
NDTV
)
Extra Intrigue
A few stories we couldn’t shoehorn in this week
🇶🇦
Qatar
is reportedly considering a bid for FIFA’s
2029
Club
World Cup
, with Spain, Morocco, and Brazil already in the mix.
🇺🇸
US
President Trump says he’s found some wealthy
people to buy TikTok
, flagging he might reveal more details within a couple of weeks.
And a
🇨🇳
Chinese
herbal medicine maker saw its
shares soar over 82,000%
before plunging again, drawing the attention of various regulators.
Nightmare of the day
Credits: Im Soon-shuck/Yonhap via AP.
Need an injection of gratitude to get you to the end of the week?
Be thankful you don’t have to deal with an invasion of ‘lovebugs’ that stick to floors, cars, and trains. The insects, first detected locally in Seoul in 2022, have now taken over the city’s surroundings, causing significant nuisance (and distress) for South Koreans.
Thursday quiz
1) Which of the following is the oldest continuously used national flag?
🇩🇰 Denmark
🇬🇭 Ghana
🇲🇳 Mongolia
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) Which of the following is the world's only non-rectangular/square national flag?
San Marino
Nepal
Kiribati
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) What's the most common colour among national flags?
Blue
White
Red
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate