URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/reduced-size-template-a27bf606539316c2
Title: 🌍 Three intriguing elections

Today’s briefing:
— Three intriguing elections
— France’s two surprising spies
— Italy’s one familiar angel
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Sometimes it’s worth dressing to fit the local vibes. That’s why I duly donned a sulu in Fiji, a guayabera in Guatemala, and a soft-knit sleeveless cardigan in Canberra.
But there was one outfit I couldn’t bring myself to try. A decade ago I was on a work trip in
Myanmar
(whose
sham election
we explore today), around the time everyone was excited about this beautiful country’s democratic transition.
Rolling through the eerie Naypyidaw capital (which paranoid generals secretly carved out of the jungle to fortify themselves against urban unrest), I noticed military bigwigs sporting a kind of 70s-era safari suit, featuring aggressively-short short-shorts.
Lots
of thigh.
And I remember thinking, okay it’s hot, it’s humid, and you’ve got some respectable calf game there Colonel, but c’mon man, put on some pants.
Number of the day
$250B
That’s the estimated amount Argentines have stashed away in hiding places, offshore accounts, and deposit boxes,
six times
the central bank’s dollar reserves! President Milei is hoping he can convince citizens to normalise that cash back into Argentina’s stabilising economy.
Election season
Remember 2024? Us neither. But we are reliably told it was the world’s biggest-ever electoral year, with a majority of eligible voters invited to the polls. It felt like the new world order was being decided. And in many ways, that’s exactly what happened.
But 2026 is shaping up to be another historic electoral year for folks in one of the world’s most dynamic yet overlooked regions, so let’s get you up to speed, starting with…
Myanmar
🇲🇲
The ✌️results✌️ are in! There are not enough sassy air-quotes in all the internet to tell you about this sham election in junta-run Myanmar, so we’ll just use that one pair above when we confirm that, omg, Myanmar’s military-backed party has won!
A few fun facts
:
Under Myanmar’s military-drafted constitution, guess who automatically gets a veto-proof
25% of all seats
? That’s right, they’re for generals selected by the commander-in-chief himself! And speaking of…
The constitution bars Myanmar’s top general and current dictator (Min Aung Hlaing) from being
both president and military chief
. So he’ll now abdicate his military role to become president, right? Haha no. He’s set up a new ‘consultative council’ that’ll preserve his full military control, just via a new desk plaque.
And what about Myanmar’s
brutal civil war
, you might ask? The junta only controls maybe a quarter of the country, covering perhaps 50-70% of the population. And in addition to banning or sidelining opposition parties, the generals only ran polls in a subset of those controlled communities they consider “
stable
” (ie, their own strongholds).
So…
why bother?
Five years since toppling the democratically-elected government in a coup, it’s the regime’s attempt at boosting its own legitimacy at home and abroad. For us, one of the highlights has been neighbouring
China
(famously a big fan of elections)
endorsing
the process as a path to peace and reconciliation — Beijing’s core interest is stabilising its border region and remaining tight with Myanmar’s mercurial generals.
Thailand
🇹🇭
Across another Myanmar border we’ve got Thailand’s snap general election this Sunday, and it’s intriguing for so many reasons.
First
, it’s Thailand’s first full election under this constitution
without a military-appointed senate
playing a decisive role in who ends up prime minister!
The result might be a familiar scene: a power struggle between a royal-military establishment and reformists gunning for change. And that leads us to…
Second
, there’s
a cast of characters
not holding back. For example…
The ruling incumbent
(Anutin), a tycoon running Thailand’s third-largest party, has long tried to position himself as
the ‘middleman’
solution to gridlock: acceptable to both…
the establishment (he’s been a nationalist in the Cambodia border clashes), and
the reformists (he decriminalised cannabis as health minister!).
So he’s trying to rally votes with spicy lines like this: “
If Thai people want a government chosen by Cambodia, then go ahead and vote for those two parties.
”
🌶️🌶️🌶️
With this one line, he was dunking on both
a
) opposition reformists like 38-year-old front-runner
Natthaphong
, whose party lineage crushed the last elections but was blocked from power, and
b
) populists like Thailand’s powerful
Shinawatra
family, whose patriarch, sister, and daughter have now all been ousted from the top job by the establishment.
And
third
, voters are also casting their ballot in
a referendum
! It’s asking if voters want to draft a new constitution, but it’s being seen as a proxy vote on the military’s role in Thai politics. 🌶️🌶️🌶️🌶️🌶️🌶️
And now let’s cross back over yet another of Myanmar’s restive borders to visit...
Bangladesh
🇧🇩
The rebel rousers. The OG Gen Z protestors. Where else did student protests get so big, the long-time strongwoman leader (Sheikh Hasina) had to flee to India in a chopper!
Anyway, post-Sheikh Bangladesh is finally holding elections next week (Thurs 12th), 18 months after Nobel laureate Muhammad Yunus stepped in as interim leader.
And with Sheikh’s party banned, it’s
a two-horse race
between…
A
nationalist
-conservative party led by Tarique Rahman (an ex-PM’s son), and
An
Islamist
party at the head of an 11-party coalition (including the students).
Assuming (per the polls)
the nationalists win
, they’re pledging anti-corruption and reconciliation. As for Bangladesh’s role in the world? That’s not been a campaign issue, but the nationalists want an “
economy-based
” stance, which basically means a classic strategy to hedge everyone (India, China, US, Pakistan) to Bangladesh’s advantage.
In the meantime, a handful of local embassies (US, UK, Canada) are warning of the risks of extremist violence around election day.
We’re barely scratching a single region’s surface here: cross yet another of Myanmar’s borders and you’ll enter tiny
Laos
, which is scheduled for elections on February 22nd — though as a one-party state, the outcome ain’t in doubt. Ditto in nearby
Vietnam
, where there are one-party elections next month, though the real election happened last month, when the communist party consolidated Tô Lâm’s grip on power.
Intrigue’s Take
Fascinating neighbourhood, right? Looking out across a single nation’s borders, you’ll see politics dominated by generals, communists, royals, and beyond.
But what’s the bigger picture?
One
is the way these establishments keep trying to anchor democratic transitions by
entrenching their own veto power
— think Myanmar's generals locking in that 25% seat guarantee, or Thailand's military quietly shaping the senate — only to arguably just plant the seeds for more volatility down the line, particularly amid such young and increasingly active electorates.
The
second
is actually
critical minerals
, because China relies on restive Myanmar for more than half its supply of niche heavy rare earth elements like dysprosium and terbium, essential for EVs and wind turbines. Ditto, the US just signed a critical minerals deal with Thailand in October, aiming to leverage the country’s quiet processing strengths as a China-alternative node in Western supply chains for energy and defence tech.
A
third
is that eventually,
politics hits the economy
. Thailand is now on track to record ASEAN’s slowest growth (ex-Myanmar), but Bangladesh is another example — it’s due to graduate from ‘least developed country’ status this November, but instead of preparing for the loss of duty-free perks that underpin its textiles sector (80% of exports!), it’s been paralysed by political intrigue.
Sound even smarter:
Japanese voters also head to the polls this Sunday in an election almost certain to
consolidate PM Sanae Takaichi’s position
.
Nepal will then hold its first general election next month after
huge Gen Z protests
rocked the country last year.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇬🇧
UNITED KINGDOM
-
Another Epstein casualty?
Prime Minister Starmer is facing growing anger from his own party over attempts to withhold information about his appointment of Peter Mandelson as (ex) ambassador to the US. Mandelson, a close friend of Jeffrey Epstein, is now facing serious allegations he leaked sensitive information to Epstein. (
Guardian
)
Comment
:
This has really escalated for Starmer, with his own parliamentarians now briefing the UK’s famously rabid tabloids that his days might be numbered. But the question is who’s capable of replacing him, given one obvious name (his own former deputy, Angela Rayner) is still grappling with a possible tax scandal.
🇫🇷
FRANCE
-
AirBnSpy.
Paris authorities have arrested two citizens of China on suspicions they tried using a Starlink connection — plus their own big satellite dish — to intercept sensitive military and government data from their AirBnB near Bordeaux. (
Politico
)
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
Busy phones.
President Xi has used his latest video-call with Russia’s Putin to propose work on a “
grand plan
” to deepen their vaunted no-limits partnership. The same day, Xi held a call with President Trump covering Taiwan, Ukraine, Iran, and trade. (
Reuters
)
Comment
: The DC and Beijing read-outs each had their own familiar angle on the Trump-Xi call, but they both set a pretty constructive tone ahead of their planned April summit in China.
🇨🇺
CUBA
-
Interesting plane you’ve got there…
A sanctioned Russian cargo plane that previously delivered air defence systems to Venezuela has now landed in Cuba, though it’s unclear what might be onboard this time. Cuba and Russia signed a military cooperation agreement last March, facilitating the possible supply of specialists and equipment. (
DefenceNews
)
Comment
: Russia’s cargo delivery last October did little (if anything) to help Maduro, and it’s hard to see it making any meaningful difference for Cuba either. It looks like further evidence, however, that a common link seeking to thwart so many of Trump’s foreign priorities (Venezuela, Cuba, China, Iran, North Korea) is… Putin.
🇹🇼
TAIWAN
-
Counter budget.
President Lai has warned that if Taiwan’s more Beijing-friendly opposition continues to block a planned US arms package, it “
could lead the international community to misunderstand Taiwan’s determination to defend itself.
” In response to US senate concerns, the opposition
argues
it supports strengthening Taiwan’s defence, but won’t sign blank checks, and wants more funding for soldier pay. (
Taipei Times)
🇳🇬
NIGERIA
-
Another massacre.
Authorities have blamed an ISIS-linked group for a massacre in western Nigeria’s Kwara state that’s left ~170 (!) predominantly-Muslim villagers dead. (
DW
)
Comment
: That’s the same state where the US hit ISIS targets at Nigeria’s request around Christmas. Meanwhile, the US has confirmed it’s now deployed a small military team (intel, training) to support Nigeria’s anti-terrorism efforts.
Extra Intrigue
Meanwhile, in other worlds…
Media
: The Washington Post has
laid off a third of its staff
, drastically reducing its international coverage to focus on “
national security issues
”.
Space
: China has dropped a concept video for
a futuristic space carrier
with unmanned fighter jets (even optimistic state outlets say it’s still 20-30 years away).
Tech
: A California-based software company has launched
Moltbook, a social media platform
exclusively for… not humans, but AI.
Painting of the day
Does that angel above look familiar? She’s recently made a brief but scandalous appearance in one of Rome’s oldest churches, the ~4th century Basilica of San Lorenzo.
When the resident priest asked parishioner and local artist Bruno Valentinetti for help restoring the 17th century fresco, Bruno must’ve said something like
hold my Peroni
, because he ended up making the cherub look
exactly
like Italy’s leader, Giorgia Meloni.
Once pics started circulating online, criticism ensued across the media, the opposition, and even the Vatican, until Bruno quietly removed his Giorgia touch this week. Why’d he do it? Bruno won’t say.
Today’s poll
Do you think the UK's Keir Starmer will lose his job over the Epstein-Mandelson scandal?
❌ Yes, even his own party is fed-up
🌧️ No, he'll weather the storm
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
What do you think will happen after New START expires?
🚀
A nuclear arms race (52%)
🖊️ They'll negotiate a new deal (46%)
✍️ Other (write in!)  (2%)
Your two cents:
🚀
R.C.O:
“A lose-lose for both sides, with unaffordable billions spent by both sides on militarily useless weapons.”
✍️
P.C.M:
“There will be no deal ahead of: 1) ending the war in Ukraine, and 2) as it approaches parity with the others, an agreement that includes China.”
✍️
T.C:
“Not much will happen that wasn't already happening - nuclear weapon delivery systems and defense systems will continue to advance, but there won't be a massive scale up in the number of weapons.”