URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/tuesday-e0b2
Title: 🌍 Three top quotes from that group chat

IN TODAY’S EDITION
1️⃣ The top 3 quotes from
that
group chat
2️⃣ Intrigue’s commodities corner
3️⃣ Workout of the day
Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
If you’re anything like me, you’ve probably had that ‘gut punch’ moment when you realised that you stuffed up big time: whether it’s getting flagged for missing a step in the embassy lockup process, or accidentally texting the person you’re talking about your exact thoughts about them (“
whoops, wrong person!
”
😅
).
We can only wonder what thoughts are top of mind for some senior members of the Trump Administration, who’ve accidentally looped a journalist into their group chat on Signal recently. One thing I know for sure is that it’s certainly given the DC meme-chinery plenty of content.
Anyway, today’s briefing leads with an update on
that
group chat
, and what it might mean for the world.
PS
- Ever wondered what it’s like to be
foreign minister
for a
NATO ally without a military
? Don’t miss our unfiltered chat with
Iceland
’s Thordis Kolbrun Gylfadottir, online
this Friday
at 9.30am ET.
Register
here!
THE HEADLINES
Trump to tariff buyers of Venezuelan oil.
The president has announced additional 25% tariffs on any
nation buying Venezuelan oil or gas
, effective from 2 April. Venezuela’s buyers include China, India, Spain, Italy, plus even the US itself. Meanwhile, Trump has also suggested a softening in his trade approach, hinting he “
may give a lot of countries breaks
”.
US and Russia to release joint statement?
Monday’s US-Russia talks on a possible Russo-Ukraine peace plan reportedly lasted 12 hours, and there was
word of a possible joint statement
. But it’s not dropped yet, and the Kremlin is now saying the contents of those US-Russia talks won’t be made public.
Turkish protests continue into sixth day.
President Erdogan has called protests against the arrest of his top political rival “
evil
”, and is
accusing the opposition of inciting violence
. Authorities have made over 1,100 arrests, with reports suggesting several journalists have also been arrested in their homes.
Oscar-winning Palestinian director detained.
The Israeli journalist and Oscar-winning co-director of ‘
No Other Land
’ has alleged Israeli settlers just beat his Palestinian co-director Hamdan Ballal in his West Bank home,
before Israeli authorities detained him
. The Israeli military hasn’t immediately commented.
Samsung CEO dies.
Samsung Electronics CEO and vice chair Han Jong-hee has
died of a cardiac arrest
, aged 63. He chaired last week’s shareholder meeting, where investors grilled executives on Samsung’s failure to ride the AI boom.
TOGETHER WITH BOXABL
BOXABL officially reserved NASDAQ stock ticker symbol BXBL…
BOXABL is the home construction company bringing assembly line automation to the home industry. Most houses take seven months to complete. BOXABL can put one out of the assembly line every four hours, including electrical, HVAC, and plumbing!
With their patented technology and 53 patent filings, BOXABL believes they have the potential to disrupt a massive and outdated trillion dollar building construction market. And they just reserved the ticker symbol BXBL on Nasdaq*!
Currently, shares are being offered at $0.80 per share wiith a $1,000 minimum investment.
Time is running out - the closing date to invest in BOXABL on StartEngine is 3/29.
Invest Now!
TOP STORY
The top three quotes from
that
group chat
One of the screenshots shared by The Atlantic. ‘JV’ is JD Vance, Ratcliffe is the CIA chief, Waltz is the national security advisor, ‘MAR’ is Secretary of State Rubio, and ‘SM’ is Trump’s deputy chief of staff, Stephen Miller. ‘Houthi PC’ refers to a committee of principals (mostly cabinet members), and ‘MAL’ likely refers to Trump’s Mar-a-Lago.
Reporters can spend decades going to extraordinary lengths to score a scoop that shines a light into the darkness and perhaps even alters the course of history.
Then there's
The Atlantic
's Jeffrey Goldberg, who we like to imagine was maybe in line at Chipotle when Trump's
national security advisor
wrongly
added him to a group chat
of cabinet secretaries sharing extraordinary deets about US plans to hit the Houthis.
Anyway, you can bet every foreign embassy in DC is right now reporting on this mess-up and what it means for our world, so here are three of the top quotes and why they matter:
"
I fully share your loathing of European free-loading. It’s PATHETIC
"
That's Defence Secretary Hegseth
amen
-ing VP Vance, who reluctantly goes along with the Houthi strikes (
last week
) despite noting, "
I just hate bailing Europe out again
.” His argument is that this is fundamentally Europe's problem, because Houthi attacks on Red Sea shipping put much more of Europe's seaborne trade at risk than America’s.
Vance’s frustration
isn't new
, though it's interesting to see the chat
dunk on Egypt too
, presumably given it earns a cool $9B (in a good year) from Suez Canal fees yet has been pretty absent from allied efforts to end the Houthi attacks (it’s wary of antagonising Iran).
"
I think messaging is going to be tough no matter what
"
That's VP Vance weighing in not so much on how to end the Houthi threat, but on
how to frame it
publicly — and he disagrees with his boss (Trump), suggesting it's inconsistent for the president to criticise Europe’s free-loading then bail it out again in the Red Sea.
Interestingly, Vance also flags that "
nobody knows who the Houthis are
", suggesting a need to anchor any use of US power abroad with a war-weary public back home.
Anyway, in the end, Hegseth’s press release last week
duly emphasised
this was about sending an “
unrelenting
” message to Iran (which backs the Houthis) and defending a “
core national interest
” (freedom of navigation).
“
We are currently clean on OPSEC
”
That's Defence Secretary Hegseth again, assuring everyone there’s been full
operational security
(no leaks) — all, of course, in messages live-leaked to a high-profile journalist. And funnily enough, that same journalist then declined to republish Hegseth’s sensitive group chat updates (targets, munitions, timing) out of concern for national security.
Of course, critics are now
calling
for Hegseth’s resignation, particularly after he
vowed
on Friday to use polygraph tests to catch leakers. But the president is backing him for now.
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
We’ve all sent messages to the wrong Gary, added work Gary to the football chat, or called our teacher ‘mom’. But this saga really dials that dynamic all the way up to 11.
First
, it's a dream for foreign capitals to understand how the US makes its decisions, let alone why. And this group chat makes those dreams come true even if, in many ways, it confirms what’s already apparent (like real resentment around allied free-loading).
Second
, foreign capitals value insights into key players, and they might glean something on Hegseth here — could his eagerness to share spicy updates with cabinet members, not to mention his push for an immediate move against the Houthis, be an effort to firm up his authority after eking out the slimmest of senate confirmations? (for his part, Hegseth frames it as an effort to restore US deterrence after Biden’s term).
Third
, if these US hits on Houthi targets were intended to send one message (foes beware), they've ended up sending something else along the way, including about divisions within the White House and the West, not to mention flat incompetence.
Fourth
, while this’ll all be music to an adversary’s ears, you can bet it’ll also fuel pre-existing allied doubts not only around US intent, but also US reliability (which’ll also be music to an adversary’s ears, btw).
And
finally
, we’ll leave you with these observations, knowing full well that Intriguers are more than capable of holding multiple things to be true at once:
You can support a party while acknowledging its faults (leave 'whataboutism' to the Soviets, who wielded it to erode rather than uphold standards), and…
You can streamline bureaucracy without, you know, pumping classified info through an unclassified app while accidentally looping in a journalist.
Also worth noting:
Well we’ll be darned, but the directors of the CIA, FBI, NSA, DIA, and National Intelligence are all due to
testify before Congress
today (Tuesday).
The group chat included 18 people such as the VP; the secretaries of state, defence, and treasury; plus the president's national security advisor, chief of staff, director of national intelligence, and CIA chief.
The ‘Signal’ messaging app they used is common in DC, though it’s not approved for classified info. At least one member of the chat (Trump’s envoy Steve Witkoff) might’ve joined while in Moscow.
While the US has (with the UK) led most strikes on Houthi positions, other allies like France, Italy, and Canada have also served in the coalition.
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇯🇵
Japan
: Beijing has rejected Tokyo’s request to
remove a line from a meeting read-out
in which Japan’s prime minister supposedly declared that “
Japan respects the positions elaborated by the Chinese side
”. Western capitals often now rush to release their own read-outs to avoid getting verballed like this.
🇧🇬
Bulgaria
: Parliament has approved the creation of a
government-backed supermarket chain
to sell food at a reduced mark-up in Bulgaria’s poorest regions. Critics query whether the proposal breaches EU competition law.
🇹🇭
Thailand
: Prime Minister Paetongtarn Shinawatra will
face a no-confidence vote tomorrow (Wednesday)
, after the opposition alleged she’s unduly influenced by her father, a popular if polarising former leader. She has a majority in parliament so is expected to survive the vote.
🇵🇪
Peru
: The legislature has now
removed Peru’s interior minister
, arguing he failed to stem rising violent crime in Lima. A state of emergency remains in place, with troops in the streets to back the police.
🇹🇩
Chad
: Chad’s foreign ministry has chastised a general in neighbouring Sudan after he suggested
Chadian airports could be military targets
for helping the UAE ship arms to a rival paramilitary in Sudan’s civil war. While the UAE denies any role, UN reports have described the UAE-Chad smuggling allegations as credible.
FROM OUR SPONSORS
Only About 4% of U.S. Pet Owners Have Pet Insurance.
We all hope our pets stay healthy, but unexpected accidents or illnesses can wreck a budget overnight. Emergency visits can cost $1,500 or more, and major surgeries can easily exceed $5,000. Other conditions can cost pet owners thousands of dollars in medications and treatments. Pet insurance can lighten this financial load – some plans start as low as $10 a month.
Check out Money’s top pet insurance providers
and take the worry out of pet parenting!
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Our commodities corner is back
Oil
: Russia’s central bank has warned that the US and OPEC
have the capacity to flood the global market
and collapse prices (further straining Putin’s ability to finance his war).
Rice
:
Prices have dipped
after India removed the last of its rice export controls.
Diamonds
: One industry source suggests 52% of engagement rings
featured lab-grown (rather than natural) diamonds
last year, further pressuring the diamond industry which underpins Botswana’s economy.
Gold
: Gold prices have
edged lower this week
as Trump signals increased flexibility on US tariffs.
WORKOUT OF THE DAY
Credits: Andre Penner/AP.
Brazil’s largest city, Sao Paulo, is a city of wonders: a stunning skyline, relaxing river walks, and yes… one of the world’s largest helicopter fleets.
In fact, there are over 500 helicopters registered throughout the city as a way for the wealthy to avoid one of Sao Paulo’s other wonders: traffic. That’s why Uber trialled ‘UberCopter’ back in 2016.
Anyway, fitness entrepreneurs have now found a way to use the city’s (often idle) 200 helipads, offering roof-top spin classes.
DAILY POLL
What do you think this group chat incident means?
🤭 It was a mistake, move on
😠 It was a an outrage, heads should roll
✍️ Other (write us!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
If your government had extra funds, where would you want them invested?
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️
🪖
Defence  (12%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️ 📚 Education (19%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
💉
Healthcare (22%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
🛣️ Infrastructure (21%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🥅
Social security (6%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🔬
Science and tech  (6%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️ 💰 Tax cuts (10%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!)  (4%)
Your two cents:
💉
W.B.B:
“Healthcare is my first choice, yet I hesitated to select it because in my 30-year career in hospitals, I witnessed a lot of waste.”
🛣️
C.O.N:
“Infrastructure is like a catalyst for almost all other funds and projects.”
📚
J:
“Pick a problem, any problem. Education is the only universal solution.”
🪖
W.H:
“Given the dramatically shifting global geopolitical situation and the rapidly evolving state of weapons technology (see drones, AI, etc.), I reluctantly vote today for ‘Defence’ as first priority. Without security backed by deterrence, all other investments don't seem to make sense.”
✍️
E.H.W:
“Paying off debt to reduce the chunk of the budget spent on servicing it in years without ‘extra cash’...”
Was this forwarded to you? We're a team of ex-diplomats producing a concise and engaging geopolitical briefing for 120k+ leaders each day.
It’s free to subscribe
.
This is a paid advertisement for Boxabl’s Regulation A offering. Please read the offering circular here. This is a message from Boxabl
*Reserving a Nasdaq ticker does not guarantee a future listing on Nasdaq or indicate that BOXABL meets any of Nasdaq's listing criteria to do so.