URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/three-surprising-arms-numbers
Title: 🌍 Three surprising arms numbers

Today’s briefing:
— Three surprising arms numbers
— Will they find MH370?
— The world’s biggest consulate is in…
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Media narratives fascinate me — how they start, gain momentum and credibility, and how quickly they can completely flip the status quo.
Take defense spending. I’m old enough to remember when defense primes were the comfy undies of western democracies — essential, supportive, but best not talked about in public. Now every country and its dog is bragging about ballooning defense budgets, and “
innovative
” arms companies are now a consensus public good. I understand why and certainly don’t disagree — it’s just that the narrative has completely changed and darn quickly too.
But what of the actual data? Well, we read
the latest SIPRI report
so you don’t have to — the mainstream narrative on this one is bang on,
defense spending
is way up, but there are some surprising nuggets in there as well. Let’s get stuck in, shall we?
Rebrand of the day
The Donald J. Trump Institute of Peace
That’s the new name for the US Institute of Peace (USIP), the Reagan-era Congress-funded thinktank which President Trump moved to gut via DOGE’s cost-cutting mandate earlier this year. The administration then quietly disbanded DOGE itself last month.
Armazing
When rattled world leaders issue a desperate call to arms, who answers?
Well of course, that’d be Lockheed, Raytheon, Northrop, Boeing, General Dynamics, AVIC, BAE, L3Harris, Norinco, Rheinmetall, and the China South Industries Group!
Thankfully, the number-crunchers at the
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute
(
SIPRI
) just dropped their latest arms industry
report
, so here are three stats to know:
$679B
That’s how much
the world’s top 100 arms-makers
earned in 2024, with ‘Murica alone accounting for ~half that revenue, and four of the world’s five biggest defense players — Lockheed alone earned a crisp $65B.
But the two of you who saw
Black Widow
(2021) will already know that big spends don’t necessarily guarantee good outcomes:
Lockheed’s coveted F-35
now runs an average of 238 days late per aircraft, with a lifetime cost now at an extraordinary $2.1T.
Though delayed or not, the Saudi ruler’s latest DC pilgrimage was a reminder how much the F-35 is still the hottest (if not cheapest) defence system in town.
Okay, so if America’s pole position is unsurprising, here’s a stat that
is
surprising
…
193%
These days we barely go a week without slipping
Europe
’s rearmament into conversation, but this 193% surge isn’t from giant Germany or even the bullish Baltics. Nope, that’s Prague’s Czechoslovak Group (CSG), enjoying a
193% revenue spike
to $3.6B with more than half tied to helping Ukraine defend itself with ammo and equipment.
And that’s intriguing — local coalition talks persist, but the Czechs have likely now voted for Ukraine-sceptic billionaire populist
Andrej Babiš
to take the helm as PM! Still, many Czechs clearly back Ukraine’s self-defence — after all, their mostly ceremonial
president
is also the pro-NATO ex-general we famously likened to Tom Cruise playing ripped Santa.
And at the end of the day, it’s not like CSG is just donating the ammo — it’s all paid for by a coalition of mostly fellow NATO and EU members.
But while we’re talking surprises…
-10%
China
's eight top defence contractors just saw a 10%
drop
in revenues to $88B! Surely this means peacenik China is now beating its swords into ploughshares, no?
Well think of it like this: was Chris Pratt more formidable as chubby Andy Dwyer in
Parks & Rec
, or when he trimmed some lbs to become the shredded Star-Lord in
Guardians
?
To put it another way, President
Xi’s corruption purge
has now rippled out of the People’s Liberation Army, with arms contracts now getting hit. Headlines gawk at the missing generals (like Xi’s own vice-chair on the Central Military Commission), but Norinco’s chair (Liu Shiquan) getting implicated triggered a 31% revenue crash!
Ditto, Xi’s earlier troop and officer number cuts were really about tackling graft, inefficiency, and disloyalty to
strengthen
— not soften — his posture. His related new disciplinary rules will hit 1 January.
So maybe that’s where we wrap: numbers reveal a lot, but not always what we think?
Intrigue’s Take
Zoom out a little, and these stats reflect the world we grew up in: the longest-running major-power world peace in millennia, sustained (or imposed?) by US power.
And yet America keeps signalling those days might now be coming to an end: its recent elections suggest folks want to ease any US burden, and debt markets suggest they might
have
to: the US now spends more on net interest than it does on defence.
As for what might come after Pax Americana? Nobody
really
knows, but the above offers hints: Europe’s defence surge suggests it’ll shoulder more of the burden, though the Czech case also hints at how fragile that might be — just one populist away from the wall.
Ditto, China’s case captures the uncertainty of its own future role: immense scale and strength, but masking some unpredictable brittleness within.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇺🇦
UKRAINE
-
More talks.
US and Ukrainian officials will continue their Russia peace talks in Florida today (Thursday). Meanwhile, the UN General Assembly has demanded Russia return all ~19,000 Ukrainian children it’s taken since the start of the war. ~57 countries including China abstained, while 12 (like Russia, Iran, North Korea) opposed. (
BBC
)
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
Closed.
DC has now halted green card, citizenship, and asylum application processing for 19 mostly African and Middle Eastern countries. President Trump had pledged to
“
permanently pause migration from all third world countries
” after an Afghan citizen shot two
national guard members last week; the same country list already faced travel curbs after June’s antisemitic fire-bombing in Colorado. (
NPR
)
🇱🇧
LEBANON
-
Direct talks.
Lebanon and Israel, who’ve technically been at war since 1948, just held their first direct civilian talks in decades, amid hopes of expanding their ongoing (if wobbly) ceasefire into broader engagement. (
MEE
)
Comment
: The biggest question mark right now is whether they can align enough to disarm Hezbollah without destabilising the region again.
🇧🇷
BRAZIL
-
TikTok’s expanding.
China-owned
TikTok has announced it’ll invest $37B to build a data centre in Brazil, its first infrastructure project in Latin America. (
SCMP
)
Comment
: Brazil is TikTok’s third-biggest market, but the warming Brazil-China ties will no doubt have helped in the giant’s decision-making process.
🇰🇷
SOUTH KOREA
-
Negotiated exit.
President Lee Jae Myung is reportedly considering reviewing South Korea’s joint US drills as a way to ease tensions with North Korea. (
Bloomberg
$)
Comment
: These are classic pre-negotiation negotiations: the North’s Kim says he won’t even talk to Trump or Lee unless they drop their denuclearisation demands, so Lee is seemingly offering to tone down the drills instead. Either way, it’s still arguably giving something (whether demands or drills) for nothing (talks that’d just legitimise Kim anyway). You could also see it all as a softening of Lee’s more hawkish announcement that he’ll now build nuclear-powered submarines in the US.
🇮🇹
ITALY
-
Gold fever.
The European Central Bank has warned Italy against plans to declare that the Italian central bank’s gold reserves (the world’s third largest) belong to the Italian people. The worry is the move could infringe central bank autonomy, breach relevant EU treaties, and enable Rome to go on a populist spending spree. (
Reuters
)
Comment
: This specific case aside, it seems inevitable that any politicisation of the US Fed will inspire others abroad: if they get a piggy-bank, why not us?
🇲🇾
MALAYSIA
-
Search again.
The search for missing Malaysia Airlines flight MH370 will resume this month under a new ‘no find, no fee’ deal with a US-UK marine robotics company. The flight mysteriously disappeared in 2014, along with 239 crew and passengers. (
Guardian
)
Comment
: This resumption seems less about any new evidence, and more about a new funding model that flips the ROI back in favour of hopefully finding the jet’s black box, and thereby solving one of modern aviation’s greatest mysteries.
Extra Intrigue
Leaders are squeezing in their final trips of the year…
🇷🇺
Russia’s
Putin is in
🇮🇳
India
for his annual summit with Modi. So far, India has clinched a $2B deal to
lease a nuclear-powered submarine from Russia.
🇩🇪
Germany
’s
foreign minister (Wadephul) will travel to
🇨🇳
China
next week, right on the heels of the French president’s own China visit.
🇮🇱
Israel’s
Netanyahu is due back in
🇺🇸
the US
on 28 December for his fifth visit of the year.
And the
🇩🇪
German
president (a mostly ceremonial position) is now in the
🇬🇧
UK
for the first such state visit in 27 years.
From our sponsors
Real Results, Real Change - Try Noom!
Say goodbye to quick fixes and hello to lasting results. Noom’s science-based program helps you change your habits for good. With personalized coaching and expert guidance, you’ll build sustainable habits that stick. Ready for real, lasting weight loss?
Start your free 14-day trial today!
Consulate of the day
Ribbon getting cut like nobody’s business. Credits: @USCGERBIL via Twitter/X.
The US just opened the world’s largest consulate in…
Erbil.
That’s the capital of Iraq’s semi-autonomous Kurdish region. Bigger than the Pentagon, and half the size of the Vatican, this US consulate is more a fortified city than an office.
And guess where the world’s largest (US) embassy is? That’s right, just down
National Highway 2
in Baghdad. And it’s the same size as the Vatican, in case you were wondering.
Successive US administrations have pledged a Pacific pivot to counter China, but the US diplomatic footprint in the Middle East still seems pretty, pretty, pretty big.
Anyway, the only size that
really
matters in diplomacy is the size of your
(ahem)
commitment to advancing the national interest.
Today’s poll
What do you think would follow any end to Pax Americana?
🕊️ A more stable multipolar world
🔥 A more volatile multipolar world
🔼 A new hegemon will rise
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
What's the best fix for India’s cybercrime problem?
🔨
Government tools and monitoring (13%)
📱
More digital literacy and caution (36%)
🛡️ Stronger private-sector solutions (banks, apps, etc.) (49%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (2%)
Your two cents:
🛡️
D.S.A:
“People replace their phones more often than they do their banks, shopping sites or other necessities. The phones are vulnerable to many different attacks, but the information inside an app is more valuable.”
✍️
A.A:
“Invest in the economy. Provide better jobs for a fair wage. Reduce governmental corruption.”
📱
C.S.C:
“It is the same answer for really everything. Know what tool you are using and know how it can be used against you, and know how to defend yourself against it.”