URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/three-key-quotes-from-the-weekend-s-quad-summit
Title: 🌍 Three key quotes from the weekend’s Quad summit

IN TODAY’S EDITION
1️⃣ 3 quotes from the Quad
2️⃣ South Korea investigates Morgan Stanley
3️⃣ Photo of the day
Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
A smug thing to do at parties is to slip the Italian word ‘
sprezzatura
’ into conversation. Allow me to give it to you in all its espresso-sniffing, prosecco-sipping, Alfa Romeo-driving glory.
Like any good foreign word,
sprezzatura
has multiple translations, including ‘considered effortlessness’, ‘rehearsed scruffiness’, and ‘studied nonchalance’. To understand, just picture that Italian socialite with ruffled hair, or a dash of stubble, or a collar slightly askew. The genius of
sprezzatura
is that it captures the fact they’ve just spent four hours nailing each and every touch of their aloof scruffiness to perfection.
So what’s that got to do with anything? The leaders of the US, Japan, India and Australia have released their latest
Quad leader statement
, and overall it looks a tad ‘meh’. But if you’re willing to squint with me a bit (or a lot), today’s briefing teases out why there’s arguably a touch of
sprezzatura
behind it all.
THE HEADLINES
Sri Lanka elects new president.
Marxist-leaning Anura Kumara Dissanayake has
taken the oath of office as Sri Lanka’s new president
, a day after winning the weekend’s election. Dissanayake has pledged to break completely from the old ways he says tumbled Sri Lanka into a deep political and economic crisis in 2022, and is vowing to establish a “
clean political culture
”.
Israel conducts “
extensive
” strikes on Hezbollah targets in Lebanon.
The Israeli military has called on civilians to move away from Hezbollah sites as it
intensifies its airstrikes
in northeastern and southern Lebanon. Meanwhile, Hezbollah also fired scores of missiles and rockets into Israel over the weekend. The Israeli strikes come a day after the US cautioned Israel not to pursue an all-out war on its northern front, with a White House spokesperson saying, “
we don’t believe that escalating this military conflict is in their best interest
”.
Scholz’s SPD takes narrow victory in state election.
Germany’s ruling party has
retained a small lead
over the hard-right Alternative for Germany (AfD) party in the eastern state of Brandenburg. While the AfD still made strong gains, the end result will be welcomed by Olaf Scholz and his Social Democrats (SPD), who’ve been punished in other recent state ballots.
UN General Assembly adopts ‘pact for the future’.
The pact, approved after months of negotiations, lays out
56 broad actions
to improve the way the world approaches peace and security, global governance, and climate change. Russia has criticised the pact after it failed to insert an amendment (with backing from North Korea, Iran and others) that the UN “
shall not intervene in matters which are essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any state
”.
Modi pitches ‘Made in India’ to US tech leaders.
The Indian prime minister, in the US for the Quad summit (see below), has also attended a tech roundtable and urged top executives to
consider India as a destination
for manufacturing and innovation. India has benefitted from the ‘friend-shoring’ trend that’s seen Western corporations diversify away from China, but it still lags behind Taiwan and others.
TOP STORY
Three key quotes from the weekend’s Quad summit
Joe Biden, Australia’s Anthony Albanese, Japan’s Fumio Kishida, and India’s Narendra Modi
Joe Biden hosted the leaders of Japan, India, and Australia in his home state of Delaware over the weekend, culminating in Saturday night's joint
Wilmington Declaration
.
So let's dive in with three choice quotes to get you what you need to know.
"
As four leading maritime democracies in the Indo-Pacific, we unequivocally stand for the maintenance of peace and stability across this dynamic region
"
The ‘we’ here is the Quad.
And what's the Quad?
That's an insightful question, dear Intriguer, because you'll get very different answers depending on who you ask.
Beijing
will
tell
you it's an attempt to contain China and incite conflict. And
the Quad members themselves
(the US, Japan, India, Australia) will give you the above innocuous quote about peace and stability.
And yet the truth
is - as always - more nuanced: the Quad first emerged while coordinating aid after the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, but it soon faded as some members got nervous at China's objections that the Quad was ganging up on it: India had 100,000 Chinese troops along its border, while Australia didn’t want to risk its billions in exports to China.
But then after disappearing… the Quad suddenly reappeared a decade later and even got elevated to a leader-level summit from 2021.
What changed?
The Quad members themselves would say China changed under Xi Jinping: more border clashes with India, more claims over the South China Sea (
rejected
by an international tribunal in 2016), more economic coercion against Australia, etc. So they got the band back together again.
And what'd they say this time?
"
We seek a region where no country dominates and no country is dominated — one where all countries are free from coercion
"
After this line, the leaders went on to deliver some blunt language on who they assess is doing the dominating and the coercing: China. They even name-dropped the above 2016 ruling against it, and ‘
condemned
’ China's use of "
dangerous manoeuvres
" in the area.
But here's the thing: the statement, in all its
6,000-word
glory, never specifically mentions China. Not once. That's the result of lengthy negotiations among the four Quad members on how to approach China, with the US generally wanting to call a spade a spade, while the others have - to varying degrees - long been wary of then getting
hit
with that spade.
So the result? This Wilmington Declaration is somehow the Quad's strongest-ever language on China, without ever actually mentioning China. Isn’t diplomacy fun?
Okay,
but any action?
"
The Quad is... a force for good that delivers real, positive, and enduring impact
"
Quad members have received
a lot
of feedback from countries tired of feeling forced to '
pick a side
' between China and the US. And the region has also voiced criticism which we’ll summarise here by paraphrasing an infamous quote a Kenyan official once dropped:
every time China visits, we get a hospital; and every time the US visits, we get a lecture
.
So Quad members have been hustling to make the Quad both
more positive and more concrete
. And you can see this in the declaration itself, featuring pledges on everything from eradicating cervical cancer and issuing more scholarships, through to transporting more aid, rolling out more solar panels, doing more coast guard cooperation, and beyond.
The idea, in theory at least, is to give the region options rather than force any choices.
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
There’s still a pretty widespread view (encouraged by this latest broad Quad declaration) that the group is
struggling to find its feet
, kinda begging the question - what’s the point? And with one Quad leader (Biden) leaving office in January, and another (Kishida) leaving office
this week
, why even host the summit now?
Well, it’s worth zooming out and remembering that the Quad is just
one of many
regional initiatives seeking to grapple with a more confrontational China. Each one might not seem much on its own, but collectively the hope is they’re enough to deter a war over, say, Taiwan or the South China Sea.
So if you’ll forgive the circular logic here, the point of this Quad summit was really to ensure there'll be
more
Quad summits in the future
, as leaders come and go and the group finds its feet. That’s also why, despite not getting a single direct mention in the statement, China's state media outlets have still devoted several editorials to criticising the Quad yet again.
Also worth noting:
India is due to host next year’s Quad summit. It was scheduled to host this year, but agreed to a swap with the US once it became clear President Biden was concluding his term in office.
A MESSAGE FROM MECO
📨
🙅‍♀️ Ever missed a potentially brilliant newsletter because it got lost among the clutter of your email inbox?
With Meco, you can
enjoy your newsletters in an app built for reading
while giving your inbox space to breathe. Meco
connects with Gmail & Outlook
so you can instantly move your newsletters to the app (and clear your inbox) without breaking a sweat.
⚡
📲
The experience is packed with features to supercharge your reading including:
Utilize the power of AI
to save time reading with newsletter summaries and audio roundups
Offline reading, smart filters, custom themes, highlight text, and bookmark links for later
Consolidate your newsletters
from across all your email inboxes. Over 40k readers enjoy their newsletters (and decluttering their inboxes) with Meco.
Try the app now!
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇰🇿
Kazakhstan
:
Authorities have detained
a Russian citizen
at Kazakhstan’s Almaty airport
after Moscow placed him on a wanted list for criticising Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. Kazakhstan has notably pushed back a little more as Russia’s regional influence has waned, but it still hands over Russian citizens on request.
🇮🇪
Ireland
:
Attending the UN General Assembly in New York,
Irish President Michael Higgins has
accused Israel of leaking a letter
he wrote congratulating Iran’s new president Masoud Pezeshkian in July. While Ireland never published the letter, it’s been circulating - and drawing criticism - online. Israel denies any involvement.
🇰🇷
South Korea
: Seoul’s securities exchange operator has announced it’s investigating
Morgan Stanley after
the US-based firm sold shares in SK Hynix
(a chipmaker) just before releasing a report that crushed its stock price. While Korea Exchange says it’s approaching the matter
with caution
,
industry sources have noted that
offloading a million shares in a day is unusual.
🇪🇨
Ecuador
: Much of Ecuador was dark yesterday (Sunday) after the
government shut down electricity in half the country’s 24 provinces
, as historic droughts reduce water levels at the Andean country’s hydro plants. Starting this week, there’ll be nationwide, eight-hour, nightly power cuts from Monday to Thursday as the government enlists the military to help manage key dams.
🇨🇩
DR
Congo
:
Congo has
released 600 prisoners
from the country’s main Makala prison on Saturday in an effort to decongest the overcrowded facilities. The move comes just weeks after an attempted Makala jailbreak left 130+ people dead.
EXTRA INTRIGUE
🤣
Your weekly roundup of the world’s lighter news
A cat has somehow managed to travel from Wyoming back to California
after running away
during a family trip to Yellowstone National Park.
Authorities have fined a British woman $650 for
leaving IKEA furniture outside
for passers-by to take.
There’s some controversy emerging out of another zoo in China, after visitors captured footage of
dogs painted to look like pandas
.
Apple orchards in Canada’s Saskatchewan province are being swamped with callers asking to buy their
purple apples
that taste like cinnamon - but it turns out the viral images were just AI-generated fakes.
And UK authorities have had to cancel a morning train to Gatwick after
two squirrels boarded a carriage
then refused to leave.
PHOTO OF THE DAY
Credits: KCNA
North Korea’s supreme leader, Kim Jong Un, popped over to inspect one of his special forces units earlier this month. But a photo of the occasion has turned heads: while the troops conducted target practice, Kim’s armed security stood over each soldier.
Why? NK News, a specialised publication,
wrote
that the image was potentially a sign that
“security concerns”
have risen in the country, with Kim becoming more paranoid.
DAILY POLL
What do you think about the Quad?
🦜 Another pointless talk shop
🕊️ A contribution to regional peace and security
🔥 A naked attempt to contain China
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Last Thursday’s poll:
If you were nominated to a cabinet, which portfolio would you choose and why?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🤝
Foreign policy (25%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🚢
Trade (5%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
💸
Economy and finance (7%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
💼
Justice (8%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️
🔬
Innovation, science and technology (13%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️
📖
Education (13%)
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🌳
Environment (10%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🩺
Health  (7%)
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 🎖️ Defence (9%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!) (2%)
Your two cents:
🔬
D.S:
“Innovation, science, and technology will become the areas of most long-lasting and pervasive influence in every country.”
📖
A.K:
“The future of our democracy is with our youth.”
🩺
M.R:
“Health is key for all other cabinets. No health, no economy, no innovation, no education.”
🚢
L.V:
“Trade after all makes the world go around, and I would relish the opportunity to promote access to new markets to rising entrepreneurs.”
Was this forwarded to you? We're a team of ex-diplomats producing a concise and engaging geopolitical briefing for 100k+ leaders each day.
It’s free to subscribe
.