URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/tuesday-0188
Title: 🌎 Three golden tales as our world wobbles

IN TODAY’S EDITION
1️⃣ 3 golden tales
2️⃣ Diplomats on the move
3️⃣ TV of the day
Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Many myths and tales centre around gold — from King Midas’ greedy wish to Jason’s ‘Golden Fleece’, and of course the various iterations of ‘lost’ cities of gold. Ancient civilizations held gold in high regard, and often associated it with the gods and immortality.
Nowadays, society has a different take on gold. Warren Buffet, for one, believes that investing in gold is a way of “
going long on fear
”. What motivates many gold purchasers is their belief that the ranks of fearful will grow, and that gold is a safe-haven in times of turmoil.
Keep that in mind as we dive into today’s top story on
gold and its current record-high prices
.
THE HEADLINES
China begins military drills off Taiwan (again).
China’s military has launched
large-scale exercises near Taiwan
in what it’s calling “
a stern warning
” against independence. The exercises have included simulated attacks and blockades. China also has a research vessel (a suspected spy ship) in Australian waters.
Europe to hit Big Tech in tariff retaliation?
The EU is reportedly mulling
going after US banks and tech companies
in retaliation for various new US tariffs due tomorrow (Wednesday). There’ve also been reports Mark Zuckerberg has been lobbying Trump to resist an expected EU ruling against Meta.
Israel strikes Beirut as ceasefire wobbles.
Israeli jets have
struck the Lebanese capital
twice in the last three days, arguing it’s in response to Hezbollah rockets and attack planning. Meanwhile, UN aid chief Tom Fletcher is demanding answers after the recovery of
15 dead rescue workers
in Gaza, with an initial Israeli statement arguing the aid convoy approached without prior coordination.
Le Pen lashes sentencing.
The French opposition figure is vowing to appeal her embezzlement conviction and five-year ban on running for office, which she’s labelled
a “
political decision
”
. Fellow populist-nationalists across Europe and the US have voiced their solidarity.
US embassies tell suppliers to ditch DEI.
Spain and France have criticised a US move urging local suppliers for US missions to
ditch their diversity initiatives or risk payment freezes
.
TOGETHER WITH FOREIGN AFFAIRS
Discover the
Foreign Affairs
Today newsletter
Expert essays on today’s most pressing geopolitical debates curated by the editors of
Foreign Affairs
. From U.S.-Chinese relations and the course of the war in Ukraine to global trade and the future of artificial intelligence in warfare,
Foreign Affairs
Today explores the key debates shaping international affairs—delivered straight to your inbox every weekday.
Sign up for free
TOP STORY
Three golden tales as our world wobbles
Gold prices smashed a new record yet again on Monday, breaking past $3,100/oz.
Why?
The
proximate answer
is we’re now a day away from Trump unveiling his next tariffs on
all
countries (not just those with US trade imbalances) — and the related unpredictability is making it trickier for executives to plan, investors to trade, and consumers to buy.
So more folks are parking their cash in presumed safe-heavens like gold. But also…
There’s
broader volatility
in the air (wars, tech disruption, political intrigue)
That’s driving a
longer-term
hunger for safe-havens, and yet
Uncertainty around
America’s own trajectory
is nudging more traders to stash their cash in other currencies like the yen and Swiss franc (both at recent highs).
So as the dollar records its worst quarter since 2022, gold — priced in dollars — goes up.
Anyway, while that all plays out, here are
three intriguing gold tales
we’re tracking:
Central banks are still hoovering up gold
They just bought more than 1,000 metric tons of gold for the third consecutive year, and look set for a four-peat in 2025. Whether it’s Turkey, India, or Poland, they’re all keen to:
a)
Hedge
against currency fluctuations and inflation
b)
Maintain
stability and credibility in their financial systems, and
c)
Diversify
their vaults away from over-reliance on any single asset like the USD.
That last driver has really gained momentum since Putin invaded Ukraine — Biden’s move to wield the world’s dollar-reliance as a cudgel to hit Putin (via sanctions) startled some who fear being next. So it’s no wonder today’s top gold buyers include strongmen like Turkey’s Erdogan, India’s Modi, and China’s Xi.
Interestingly, the main exception in the top ten is Poland (at #1), though this makes sense when you remember
a)
it borders both Russia and Ukraine so it wants a buffer against any war spill-over, and
b)
it’s a NATO ally, so it wants any buffer against US equivocation.
And speaking of which…
Do some nations want their gold back?
It’s not just illiberal strongmen clutching gold.
Take
Germany
, which has the world’s second-largest reserves, but it doesn’t stash that gold in one big Scrooge McDuck pile underneath the Bundesbank. At least, not that we’ve heard? Rather, Germany diversifies by stashing half its gold abroad, with 37% ($120B) at the New York Fed, and 13% with British vaults.
But as Europeans rethink an America-first US, some previously-
fringe calls are edging closer to power
— Bundesbank chief Joachim Nagel, for example, is now having to swat away
calls
(
🇩🇪
) for Germany to bring its gold back from the US, assuring audiences, “
I have complete confidence in our colleagues at the American central bank
”.
But it’s intriguing he even feels the need to respond. As for those American colleagues…
Will the US revalue its gold?
There’s been constant chatter across DC and Wall Street that the US might re-value its gold holdings (the world’s biggest) from the old 1973 $42/oz benchmark to current $3,000+ prices — that’d theoretically deliver
a ~$750B balance sheet boost
that could help the US reduce its borrowing needs, and/or help fund Trump’s sovereign wealth fund.
But his treasury secretary (Bessent) has reiterated it’s not on the cards. He hasn’t said why, but our guess is he’s wary this kind of accounting trick would actually spook markets by
a)
seeming desperate, and
b)
not addressing the deeper US debt and deficit challenges.
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
It was JP Morgan (the guy, not his bank) who famously
testified
(
💾
) before Congress that “
money is gold, and nothing else.
” He was arguing that credit and even dollar bills all basically depend on someone else holding up their end, while gold — for reasons rooted in human history and psychology — has long carried inherent value that’s enabled the metal to hold its purchasing power across centuries.
Deep down, that all really goes to trust. Morgan used the term “
character
”. For him, if we humans can’t trust one another (his basis for all business), we can at least trust gold. But it’s worth keeping a couple other things in mind here:
First
, that doesn’t make gold infallible. There are already bears forecasting a major correction as high costs lead to lower demand and more supply, plus
Second
, the above three stories all (if inversely) eventually tie back to trust in the US and its place in the world: its trajectory, its predictability, and its dependability.
Also worth noting:
Central banks now hold around one-fifth of all the gold ever mined.
China’s central bank resumed gold purchases once Trump won in November — it’s likely a way to gird China’s financial system ahead of more US tariffs.
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇦🇫
Afghanistan
: Moscow has moved to
take the Taliban off Russia’s terrorist list
, formalising Putin’s earlier declaration that the group is a trusted ally against ISIS. While the Taliban remains under Western and UN sanctions, nearby players like Kyrgyzstan and Kazakhstan have quietly re-established contact.
🇱🇹
Lithuania
: Authorities have now recovered
the bodies of three US soldiers
from an armoured vehicle, six days after it ended up underwater during drills in Lithuania’s swampy border area near Belarus. A fourth soldier remains missing.
🇹🇭
Thailand
: The local tourism minister has said he
still expects 38 million tourists to show up this year
, notwithstanding Friday’s deadly earthquake. The Thai hotel industry, however, is forecasting an initial 10-15% drop in revenue.
🇵🇪
Peru
: China-owned MMG has moved to assure investors that
its vast copper mine in Peru isn’t being impacted
by an illegal mining boom. The company published its statement after a Bloomberg investigation triggered a 6% slump in MMG’s shares on Monday.
🇸🇾
Syria
: Interim leader Ahmed al-Sharaa has unveiled Syria’s
new 23-minister cabinet
, including representatives from the country’s religious and ethnic minorities. He’s describing his new team as
“a declaration of our joint will to build a new state”.
FROM OUR SPONSORS
Tackle your credit card debt by paying 0% interest until nearly 2027
If you have outstanding credit card debt, getting a new 0% intro APR credit card could help ease the pressure while you pay down your balances. Our credit card experts identified top credit cards that are perfect for anyone looking to pay down debt and not add to it!
Click through
to see what all the hype is about.
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Diplomacy in action
👀
🛡️
NATO
foreign ministers are
meeting in Brussels this week
(3-4 April) with Marco Rubio flagging a focus on
China
and boosting allied defence spending.
🇮🇹
The senate foreign relations committee hearing for Donald Trump’s nominated ambassador to
Italy
(the billionaire owner of the Houston Rockets) is today.
🇨🇳
China’s
top envoy Wang Yi is in Moscow to see his
Russian
counterpart Sergei Lavrov, with Wang declaring the two neighbours are “
friends forever, never enemies
” (though years like 1652, 1689, 1929, and 1969 would like a word).
🇹🇷
And over on X, the foreign ministries of
Turkey
and
Israel
are continuing their leaders’ war of words, trading some increasingly feisty barbs about
antisemitism
,
Zionism
,
Gaza
,
the Turkey protests
, and even
Pikachu
.
TV OF THE DAY
Credits: TV Garden.
A Russian language tutor once told us that to level up, you’ve gotta turn on Russian radio or television in the background as you go about your day. But how, we hear you ask? We were delighted to learn recently about an online service called
TV Garden
, which somehow streams channels from all over the world on a single website — you just pick a country, and off you go down your preferred rabbit hole.
Our favourite might be the
Random Channel
feature, which can take you from a Polish talk-show to a Venezuelan soap opera then a Bahraini sports fixture with a roll of the dice.
DAILY POLL
Where do you think is the safest place to stash your wealth right now?
💸 Bonds
📈 Stocks
👑 Gold
🏡 Real Estate
₿ Crypto
🛏️ Under the mattress
✍️ Other (write us!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think there's a real chance Trump will bomb Iran?
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️ 💣 Yep, he won't accept a nuclear Iran (45%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🙅
Nope, too risky -- it's just bluster as leverage (52%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!) (3%)
Your two cents:
🙅
M.S:
“Bombing may be a short term panacea but in the long term the revenge against America and Trump will be cataclysmic.”
💣
R.J:
“Trump struck Soleimani who was the second most important figure… he will approve a strike in Iran if he deems it necessary.”
🙅
D.J.S :
“Trump won’t have the US drop the first bomb on Iran’s nuclear facilities, but he will give Israel every conceivable form of support when it does so and total support in the war which will follow.”
✍️ R.C:
“Bombing Iran would have minimal impact, but cyber attacks would be a real threat.”
Was this forwarded to you? We're a team of ex-diplomats producing a concise and engaging geopolitical briefing for 120k+ leaders each day.
It’s free to subscribe
.