URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/reduced-size-template-1807693a4a75104b
Title: 🌍 Three big trips

Today’s briefing:
— Three big trips
— A royal farewell
— Our weekend reccs
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. With aircraft carriers heading toward Iran and President Trump threatening another strike, the ~46-year standoff has been on my mind.
Now, my nearly decade in the foreign service taught me that diplomacy can be a lot of busywork — fonts on briefings no one reads, banquet menus designed to offend no one (and therefore please no one). But sometimes the small stuff matters. After the Shah fell in 1979, the US recalled its ambassador and never sent a replacement — just a chargé d’affaires, signalling Washington didn’t think the new regime was legitimate. Eight months later, the US embassy was stormed and the rest is history (which is incidentally the podcast where I picked up that little tidbit).
It might seem a bit ridiculous, but where leaders and senior officials go — or don’t — can still send a message. So let’s take a look at
which world leaders are where this week
, and why.
Rumour of the day
Kevin Warsh
The former Fed governor is President Trump’s rumoured Fed chair pick later today (Friday), sending the USD stronger given Warsh’s past hawkish vibes (though Trump has always prioritised
lower
rates).
Rick Rieder
(BlackRock’s global fixed income CIO) is another possibility given his mix of Wall Street cred and more dovish alignment.
Travel tricks
Any travel nerd will tell you the best time to fly is right after the holidays: lower prices, quieter lounges, fewer tantrums. World leader entourages are more likely to serve the tantrums than suffer them, but several are still travelling right now so let’s look at three:
🇬🇧
Starmer does China
China’s
year of the fire horse
involves a rare, high-energy period of rapid change, which feels fair for 2026. With the world’s biggest economy (the US) pulling up the drawbridge, trade partners are now forming an orderly line to visit the world’s
second
-largest economy.
France’s Macron was back last month, then Canada’s Carney, Finland’s Orpo, and the UK’s Starmer, followed by Germany’s Merz in Feb then Trump in April. No cutting in line please.
For several (
🇨🇦
,
🇫🇮
,
🇬🇧
), it’s their first leader visit since 2017-18, so it’s intriguing to see how Western capitals frame this
re-engagement
: they avoid phrases like “
turn the page
”, or “
reset the relationship
” because of the way these imply forgetting the past (Tibet, Uyghurs) or ignoring the present (Taiwan, Hong Kong, South China Sea).
Anyway, Australia came up with “
stabilising
” ties, and the UK has gone with making them more “
sophisticated
” — each trying to reap the rewards while managing the risks. In Starmer’s case, this initial re-engagement has delivered wins that were coming anyway:
Xi
has already granted 30-day visa-free travel to ~50 countries in hopes it’ll revive his economy, though he’s again brandished it here like a special privilege, and
Starmer
finally approved China’s mega-embassy in London, not just because his spies can manage the risks, but because it’s a golden opportunity for his spies to recruit Beijing officials outside hyper-vigilant Beijing. Again, framed as a privilege.
The more significant side to all these Western visits might be what they say about long-running US efforts to get allies more aligned in
countering China
— maybe a more confrontational US has ended up pushing them closer to China instead.
And right on cue, President Trump just warned London and Ottawa that doing business with Beijing is “
very dangerous
”, prompting claims of
hypocrisy
(Trump has his own China deal) and
impossibility
(China is now the top trading partner for ~140 countries).
🇸🇾
Al-Sharaa does Russia
Syria’s Ahmed al-Sharaa just wrapped his second visit to Moscow since ending Syria’s half-century of brutal (and Russia-backed) Assad family rule. It suggests that, rather than boot Putin immediately, al-Sharaa still sees an opportunity in the leverage. So who wants what?
Putin
is anxious to secure the future of his bases in Syria’s west, particularly his sole warm water port at Tartus (beyond the one he’s occupying at Crimea), and
Al-Sharaa
’s rumoured shopping list includes Putin
a
) butting out of Syria’s Kurds,
b
) handing Assad over to stand trial (he’s living large in Moscow’s ritzy Rublyovka), and
c
) maybe even deploying forces to Syria’s
south
west to deter Israel.
Putin now seems to have delivered
the first prize
, framing his withdrawal from Qamishli airbase in Syria’s Kurdish northeast as a gesture of goodwill, though realistically this was coming anyway because
a
) Putin couldn’t sustain this base,
b
) its initial rationale collapsed with Assad, and
c
) it’s an easy trade for his more critical bases in Syria’s west.
Meanwhile, al-Sharaa seems to have
a clearer read on Putin
than many Western leaders: in last month’s interview with Al Jazeera, he recounted his shock rebel offensive back in 2024, prompting a stern Russian warning not to advance any further, or else. Al-Sharaa’s forces ignored Putin’s warning and rapidly ousted Assad. Guess what Putin did? Nada.
🇳🇬
Tinubu does Turkey
Nigeria’s Tinubu has generated headlines in Turkey the old-fashioned way: by
falling over
. But it’s a significant visit for both sides, and not just because of their nine MOUs.
For Tinubu
, Turkey offers security and investment partnerships with fewer strings than (say) Moscow’s mercenaries, Beijing’s extractors, or the West’s sermons and baggage.
As for Erdogan
, Nigeria is the crown jewel in his Africa strategy as the continent’s biggest economy, most populous nation, and largest oil producer (~1.5m bpd).
And
that Turkish Africa strategy?
It’s part of Erdogan’s broader push onto centre stage, including via the world’s third-largest embassy network, the most extensive foreign passenger network across Africa, and now even matching Russia in arms exports there, while inking defence partnerships with Senegal, Morocco, Somalia, Ethiopia and beyond.
It’s a reminder that while the world might see Africa through an East vs West race, the continent’s dark horse might just be the straddler famous for playing it both ways.
Intrigue’s Take
If we had to (and we really do) draw some common themes from the three trips above, maybe it’s this: so much of diplomacy is about figuring out
how to gift-wrap what you were doing anyway
, present it as a grand concession, then call it leverage:
Putin “
giving up
” the base he couldn’t hold
Xi “
gifting
” the visa-free access fewer Westerners want, and
Erdogan “
donating
” the security that’s his backdoor for regional influence.
There’s also a lesson in
the absolute versus the relative
— none of these leaders seem to be talking about shared values. Rather, there’s the implication maybe Turkey is a better option than the West, or maybe Russia is better down south than out, or maybe Xi is more predictable than Trump, all culminating in perhaps the biggest implication of them all: notwithstanding any individual nation’s sins, in 2026 maybe it’s better to just have options.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇨🇦
CANADA - Bad neighbours?
President Trump has threatened 50% tariffs on all Canadian aircraft (like Bombardier) after accusing the Canadians of refusing to certify America’s own Gulfstreams. Meanwhile, the FT reports the Trump administration has been meeting with fringe separatists in Canada’s oil-rich province of Alberta (though FT notes the US is unlikely to provide any material support). (
FT
)
Comment
: If any other country pulled that stunt with (say) the fringe independence movement in California, ambassadors would be booted out. Meanwhile, this news has set Indian social media on fire with claims of karma, given Delhi’s long-running gripes that Canada has been too sympathetic to Khalistani separatists in India.
🇺🇦
UKRAINE - Tech vulnerabilities.
Ukraine's new defence minister (at the Doogie Howser age of 35) is reaching out to Musk’s SpaceX amid reports (backed by a top DC thinktank) that Russian forces are using Starlink to guide drone attacks on Ukrainian cities. Meanwhile, Trump is saying Putin has respected his request
“not to fire on Kyiv”
and other towns for a week due to extreme cold. (
Euronews
)
Comment:
In adjacent news, Musk’s SpaceX is reportedly considering a
merger
with Tesla or xAI as the tech mogul aims to consolidate his empire. The latest rumours suggest he’s eyeing a mid-June IPO for SpaceX to raise $50B at a $1.5T valuation.
🇳🇪
NIGER - You did this.
Niger’s military ruler (Tiani) has accused France, Benin, and the Ivory Coast of sponsoring an attack on a military base near the capital Niamey. The junta leader, who’s similarly blamed Paris before, also thanked his “
Russian partners
” for helping repel the attack. (
Al Jazeera
)
🇦🇫
AFGHANISTAN - Hope?
Taliban-run Afghanistan is launching a $100M UN-backed food aid program amid mass deportations from neighbouring states, and a drop in foreign aid (partly due to Taliban extremism). The UN says hunger could hit 17 million locals this year. (
NBC
)
🇵🇦
PANAMA - You’re out.
In a bombshell ruling, Panama’s top court has annulled a concession allowing China-linked Hutchison to operate two out of five Panama Canal ports. (
AFP
)
Comment
: It’s a win for US efforts to wrest back control of the Canal via a US-led consortium, and a loss for China which has just spent months opposing such a move, only for a local court to rule the underlying contracts weren’t constitutional anyway.
🇮🇩
INDONESIA - Family affair.
Indonesia is rushing to calm markets after a two-day, $80B stock market rout sent shares plunging 8% and the rupiah to record lows. The trigger? Index provider MSCI flagged transparency concerns, and earlier this month President Prabowo appointed his nephew as central bank deputy governor, months after abruptly firing Indonesia’s previous market darling of a finance minister. (
SCMP
)
Comment:
We wrote about Gen Zers rising up against government corruption in Southeast Asia
here
— local gripes included nepo-babies, so Prabowo’s central bank appointment seems not just economically risky, but politically, too.
🇨🇷
COSTA RICA - More of the same, please.
With violence hitting record highs under outgoing President Chaves, Costa Ricans are likely to back his chosen conservative successor Laura Fernández on Sunday, persuaded by her tough-on-crime vibes and lack of credible opposition. (
AP
)
Comment:
Don’t make the wrong assumption this election was therefore drama-free — just a couple of weeks ago, there were sensational claims of an assassination plot against Chaves, though plenty of locals are dismissing it as pre-election theatre.
🇪🇹
ETHIOPIA - Turbulence.
Ethiopian Airlines has cancelled all flights to the country's northern Tigray region amid reports of fresh clashes there, fuelling fears a fragile 2022 peace deal could be unravelling ahead of June elections. (
BBC
)
Comment:
The brutal civil war displaced two million and left at least 600,000 dead, with Ethiopia enjoying military support from Eritrea, the UAE, Turkey and Iran.
Extra Intrigue
Some weekend reccs from Team Intrigue!
Watch:
Deaf President Now!
about
the world’s only signing university
in DC, and its 1980s fight for a deaf university president.
Read:
How
traditional Chinese medicine
practitioners are increasingly using AI to both standardise remedies and reach more patients.
Learn:
The
basic rules of cricket
before the T20 Men’s World Cup kicks off in India and Sri Lanka next week.
Royal deadline of the day
Credits: An anonymous Intriguer.
If you’ve ever travelled to Thailand, you’ll have seen pics of the queen mother (Sirikit) and her son the king (Vajiralongkorn). While the king is known for (say) spending Covid lock-down in a lavish Bavarian hotel with a vast harem, his mother has long been beloved.
So when she passed away last October aged 93, that kicked off a mourning period across Thailand, with everyone encouraged to wear subdued colours for 90 days, or a full year if you’re a government employee (surely less of a sartorial stretch for most bureaucrats).
Anyway, that initial 90-day period has now ended, with life mostly returning to normal, though best not to ask too many questions given the kingdom’s strict lèse-majesté laws, which could land you 3-15 years in the slammer for defaming or insulting the monarch.
Friday quiz
Have you been paying attention to this week’s news?
1) Over half the cryptocurrencies ever launched have failed
True
False
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) The new EU-India trade deal reportedly covers what % of world GDP?
~14
~25
~31
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) Which bank's offices got raided over money laundering claims?
HSBC
Deutsche Bank
BNP Paribas
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate