URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/three-more-escalations-for-iran
Title: 🌍 Three more escalations for Iran

Today’s briefing:
— Three more escalations for Iran
— The US and China agree… in Ghana
— Happy Marțișor?
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Yes folks, Iran leads Intrigue again today. We always try to cover the whole world, particularly the stories and angles that don’t get the focus they deserve, but
what’s unfolding in Iran right now
is far bigger than just bombs and drones whizzing back and forth across the Strait of Hormuz.
For example:
Old foes Turkey and Greece are jawing at each other after Greece deployed military reinforcements to Cyprus and other islands off the coast of Turkey.
India’s former foreign minister noted the Iranian warship sunk off Sri Lanka was only in the area at India’s invitation, potentially giving India a dog in the fight.
And most alarmingly of all, Russian influencers in Dubai are stuck in their hotels, which refuse to comp their rooms. War is hell.
Maybe that’s a bit mean, but comedy material is a little thin on the ground so the irony of wealthy Russians being inconvenienced by war will have to do for now.
So far the 2020s have been all about gamblers-in-chief in Russia, the US, Gaza and Israel rolling the dice, as other countries rush to take advantage while no-one else is watching. But we’re watching, Intriguer, which means you are too. Onward!
Number of the day
30 days
That’s the temporary waiver the US just granted for Indian refineries to buy “
stranded
” Russian crude already at sea. It’s an attempt to ease prices without ceding long-term sanctions relief to Putin (though he still gets an immediate sugar hit via these sales).
En(gulf)ed
Welcome to day seven of the Third Gulf War which (per a line via Holly Dagres) is now more of a Gulf War than the first two Gulf Wars.
Right now, the three big questions revolve around succession, secession, and suppression (always applaud outstanding alliteration). So let’s start with…
Secession
—
will the Kurds launch a ground assault?
Any list of folks denied their own state must include the ~35 million Kurds across eastern Turkey, western Iran, northern Iraq, and northeastern Syria. This ‘
greater Kurdistan
’ is the size of France and, while home to many philosophies, most want more self-determination.
That’s inevitably put Kurds
at odds with their rulers
(Turkey, Syria, Iraq, and Iran), while also drawing them into
proxy wars
: the Iranians backed them against Saddam Hussein; the Americans backed them against ISIS; the Israelis back them against ~anyone.
And that brings us to a couple of weeks ago: sensing an opportunity in Tehran’s weakness plus US-Israeli backing, six Kurdish groups united to form
The Coalition of Political Forces of Iranian Kurdistan (CPFIK)
. Their
founding charter
is pretty blunt, seeking…
“
the
overthrow
of the Islamic Republic of Iran
”, and
“
to achieve the Kurdish people’s right to
self-determination
”.
It aligns the Kurds with other Iranians seeking the end of a “
repressive regime
” — the young woman (Jina Amini) whose 2022 death triggered mass protests was herself Kurdish.
But the CPFIK’s parallel emphasis on Kurdish self-determination is the
wild-card
here:
Some Iranians could fear a broken Iran more than they might want a free Iran
Regime propaganda has long milked this fear and framed Kurds as disloyal, and
Those neighbours (Turkey, Syria, Iraq) will resent the US arming the Kurds again.
There’s also the question of why the US is telegraphing this Kurdish strategy so openly — we’ve flagged it could be to provoke the regime into attacking the Kurds and forcing their hand. It could also be to foment a sense of expectation among Kurdish communities.
Either way, it’s not just the Iranians the Kurds are worried about:
the US has a long history
of using then ditching them (like in Syria
literally last month
). And… that’s before we recall the Kurds are also out-armed, out-trained, and outnumbered.
Succession
—
Who’ll emerge as supreme leader?
Word is the late-ayatollah’s 56-year-old second-born son (Mojtaba) is the favourite, if not in the top job already. It’s possible the regime is deferring any announcement until after…
a
) his father’s funeral (ie religious-cultural reasons) and/or
b
) this US-Israeli war (ie security reasons).
The regime would ordinarily want to broadcast his appointment ASAP to signal strength, though any funeral delay now realistically offers a neat cultural figleaf for his assassination fears (openly fanned by Israeli and US rhetoric).
What’s wrong with Khamenei Jr?
He’s a mini-me: a hardliner, insider, IRGC-backed, with crackdown experience (2009), plus a massive fortune (who knew clerics got paid so well!).
Plus
from a DC perspective
, the idea of blowing billions and torching a region only to end up replacing Khamenei with Khamenei Jr just feels too much like Afghanistan 2.0.
Suppression
—
Will Azerbaijan hit back?
It’s still unclear why Iran attacked an international airport in neighbouring Azerbaijan: the country doesn’t host US bases, and it enjoys
relatively
functional ties with Iran — President Aliyev even signed a condolence book for the ayatollah!
So… why hit Azerbaijan?
The main theories include…
a
) Azerbaijan is close to Israel and (let’s be honest) hosts Mossad sites
b
) Iran’s chain of command is broken, and surviving units are trigger-happy
c
) Iran wants to further expand the war’s economic costs (one of the few viable Asia-Europe flight corridors now runs through Azeri airspace)
d
) Iran wants to thwart the
Trump Route for Peace & Prosperity
(the new transit corridor defusing Armenia-Azerbaijan tensions but side-lining Iran), and/or…
e
) Keep in mind Iran actually denies the attacks altogether, arguing they’re just Israeli false-flag attacks to draw Azerbaijan into the war.
Anyway, the decision to hit the exclave of Nakhchivan (rather than the capital) does have the hallmarks of Iranian calibration to maximise pain while minimising blowback. And either way, Azerbaijan is
blaming
Iran, warning the attack won’t go unanswered.
Intrigue’s Take
Again, let’s take a look at where this is headed, shall we?
First
, on Iran’s
munitions
, the US is now saying Iran’s daily ballistic missile launches are down 90% since day one, while its drone attacks are down 83%. So yes, Iran’s foreign minister is
talking tough
to US audiences via NBC, and its attrition strategy continues, but it does seem to diminish with each day.
Second
, on estimated
timeframes
, the US goalposts remain unclear — Hegseth insists this won’t be “
endless
”, though he’s also insisting the US can and will “
sustain this fight easily for as long as we need to.
” Plus there are leaks suggesting the Pentagon is staffing up for a conflict to run “
through September
” or more. That might just be conservative resource allocation, but it’s six or seven months away!
And
third
, if we’re potentially looking at months more of this,
the alliance costs
really start to mount: with zero heads-up, US partners and allies are now eating Iranian attacks, energy insecurity, shipping and aviation mayhem, stranded nationals, and maybe now an armed ethnic insurgency, for a war that might last through September, or maybe not.
The risk is even if Iran’s regime breaks, a victorious US emerges more isolated than ever.
Sound even smarter:
In case you’re wondering, the late ayatollah’s
first
-born son is a low-profile cleric with no meaningful public role.
President Trump has encouraged Iranian diplomats around the world to request asylum and help “
shape a new and better Iran.
”
Ukraine’s Zelensky says the US and its partners have now used more Patriot missiles in three days than Ukraine has used defending against Russia in four years.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
Particle Men
Men, you've been misinformed!
Men’s skin is about 25% thicker than women’s, but that doesn't mean it ages better. Ageing often shows later, then hits harder, with deeper wrinkles, heavier eye bags, and more visible dark spots. While women were taught prevention, most men were told to ignore the signs. Particle Face Cream was engineered to change this. This 6-in-1 formula for men reduces eye bags, dark spots, and wrinkles—without a complicated routine.
Get 20% off and free shipping now with code INTRIGUE20.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇭🇺
HUNGARY — Yoink.
Hungarian authorities have detained seven employees of a Ukrainian state-owned bank and seized two armoured vehicles carrying $80M in gold, dollars, and euros on a routine transfer from Austria back to Ukraine. In response, Ukraine has now cautioned its citizens against visiting neighbouring Hungary. (
RBC
)
Comment:
Budapest hasn’t commented, but the seizure came the same day Hungary’s beleaguered strongman prime minister (Orbán) threatened to use “political and financial tools” to force Ukraine to repair a Russian pipeline supplying Hungary. Polls suggest the Putin-friendly Orbán could be headed for electoral wipeout next month, and high energy prices aren’t helping.
🇦🇺
AUSTRALIA — But they didn’t inhale.
The big story Down Under is the prime minister’s confirmation that three Australian naval personnel were onboard the US submarine when it sank Iran’s warship off Sri Lanka this week, but they apparently didn’t take part in the operation. (
ABC
)
Comment:
That Aussie deployment is part of Australia-UK-US (
AUKUS
) training ahead of Australia getting nuclear-powered submarines, but it touches on several national debates, like
a
) whether AUKUS is dragging Australia into US wars, and
b
) whether Australia is now party to US breaches of international law.
🇨🇳
CHINA — Arms up.
China’s annual political-legislative
Two Sessions
extravaganza has revealed Beijing will increase its defence budget by 7% this year. President Xi’s stated aim is to have a world-class force by 2050, while US intelligence has long claimed his unstated aim is to be
ready
to take Taiwan by next year. (
Straits Times
)
Comment:
You can spin that 7% number however you want: it’s the slowest rise in five years, slower than the double-digit splurges before 2016, and it brings China’s defence spending to ~a third of America’s. But lifting China’s defence spending share in the region from 37% to 44% in a decade, it’s rattling the neighbours.
🇨🇾
CYPRUS — Remember that conflict?
As Greece deploys forces to back Cyprus amid Iranian attacks, Turkey is flagging its displeasure, arguing
a
) some deployments breach the demilitarised status of islands near Turkey, while
b
) sending Greek frigates and F-16s to Cyprus is provocative given the island’s Greek-Turkish split. (
Euractiv
)
Comment:
Whether Athens is indeed just exercising its sovereign right to help Cyprus against Iran, or manoeuvring for advantage in its long-running territorial tiff with Turkey, it’s another indicator of our new multipolar world: as each crisis opens up new voids, capitals will use (or be seen to use) the cover of chaos to take a nibble.
🇵🇭
PHILIPPINES
— Wrong set of hands.
Authorities have arrested three security officials on espionage charges for allegedly passing sensitive details about Manila’s South China Sea resupply missions to China. It’s prompted calls to update Philippine espionage laws. (
Reuters
)
🇧🇷
BRAZIL — Bouncing checks.
Banks in Brazil will now have to pay $6B into the country’s deposit insurance fund to help cover losses from November’s collapse of Banco Master. (
Bloomberg
$)
Comment:
As big and promising a market as Brazil may be, it’s a reminder of the risks — Brazil’s foreign banks (like Spain’s Santander, the UK’s HSBC, America’s Citi) are left part-holding the bag for one banker who’s facing a major fraud investigation.
🇬🇭
GHANA — Cut us a deal.
Foreign embassies in Ghana (including the US and China) are trying to persuade Accra to halt a proposed gold royalties hike that could start next week. The new arrangement would replace the current ~5% royalty with a sliding scale as high as 12%, tied to high bullion prices. (
Business Insider Africa
)
Comment:
Ghana obviously wants a bigger slice of gold’s recent record prices, whereas the rare US-China alignment is because both powers have big miners in town, including America’s Newmont (world #1) and China’s Zijin (#4).
Extra Intrigue
In other worlds…
Trade:
The next scheduled joint review of the United States–Mexico–Canada Agreement (USMCA) will
kick off
from March 16.
Toys:
There are new
Barbie dolls
(including a Serena Williams) hitting the market for
International Women’s Day
(Sunday).
Nukes:
Finland’s defence ministry is reversing a ban on
hosting
nuclear weapons, arguing the 1980s-era rule no longer makes sense.
Tradition of the day
Credits: Embassy of Denmark in Romania
It’s Friday so we thought we’d offer a good ol’ twofer deal to usher you into the weekend: this one is an embassy
and
a UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage item.
The building above is in fact the Danish mission in Bucharest, with some AI embellishing (from the embassy itself!) to mark this week’s ancient tradition of
Marțișor
.
Celebrated across Bulgaria, North Macedonia, Moldova, and Romania, folks wear a brooch with a red and white string to bring good luck as spring dawns.
Friday Quiz
Test your knowledge of this week’s (
other
) news!
Which country went to the polls on Thursday?
Nepal
Somalia
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Which country declared a state of emergency?
Trinidad and Tobago
Mongolia
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Which country is looking to buy over 100k cars from India?
Pakistan
Indonesia
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate