URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/trump-and-xi-play-chicken9f6f
Title: 🌍 Trump and Xi play chicken

IN TODAY’S EDITION
1️⃣ Trump and Xi play chicken
2️⃣ The Intrigue jobs board
3️⃣ Flight of the day
Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
CS Lewis (
The Chronicles of Narnia
) has a line from 1946 when he almost describes the internet before it was born, warning of “
the evils of rapid diffusion of news that the sorrows of all the world come to us every morning
”.
We’re building Intrigue on the premise that folks
do
want to stay in the loop, just maybe without all that gratuitous sorrow. So thanks for spreading the word (and if you use your unique referral link down the bottom, you can score some sweet sweet perks).
Anyway, let’s talk about this historic game of inter-continental chicken now playing out between
the world’s two largest economies: China and the US
.
PS
— Don’t miss our unfiltered chat on
the future of democracy in the age of AI
, with superstar guest
Audrey Tang
, Taiwan’s ambassador-at-large for cyber affairs. It’s online next
Wednesday April 16, 8pm EST
.
Register here
!
THE HEADLINES
VP Vance in spat with China.
Beijing has called JD Vance “
ignorant and impolite
” after he remarked that
America “
borrow[s] money from Chinese peasants
to buy the things those Chinese peasants manufacture
”. More on that fraught US-China relationship below.
South Korea presents emergency auto measures.
Seoul’s new
emergency measures aim to cushion the blow
of the new US tariffs on foreign-made cars — they include financial support, tax breaks, and subsidies.
Ukraine captures Chinese nationals fighting for Russia.
President Zelensky says his forces have
captured two Chinese nationals
fighting for Russia in Ukraine’s Donetsk region — he’s asking Beijing for an explanation. The US has called the reports “
disturbing
”.
US to leave Polish NATO hub.
US troops will
move out of a Polish military base
used to facilitate weapons transfers to Ukraine, citing a cost-cutting drive — they’ll relocate to other posts in the country. Meanwhile, the US has
fired a top military official
at NATO’s HQ for unclear reasons.
UK borrowing costs hit highest since 1998.
Trump’s tariffs have curbed investor confidence, with many preferring short-dated bonds rather than their long-dated peers, a move that’s
pushed up UK borrowing costs
.
TOGETHER WITH GROWTH SCHOOL
Make 2025 your Best Year With This
$399
FREE AI Masterclass
If you don’t become an AI-enabled professional in 2025, you will:
Get replaced by a person who uses AI.
Face slow career growth and income.
Spend hours on tasks that can be done in 10 minutes.
Here’s why you can’t miss this:
✅
Learn 30+ cutting-edge AI tools to completely transform the way you work, market, and lead.
✅
Automate your workflows and reclaim
20+ hours a week
✅
Create an
AI-powered version of YOU
—a digital clone that handles the tedious work while you focus on what truly matters.
This 3 hour workshop will make you a master of prompting & talk about hacks, strategies & secrets that only the top 1% know of. So don’t think twice, you have NOTHING to lose.
Register here (first 100 people get it for free + $500 bonus)
🎁
TOP STORY
Trump and Xi play chicken
We’ve
already explored
Trump’s tariffs, but it’s worth a quick recap of his rationale before we tour today’s wild ripple effects:
US trade with China hasn’t made Beijing more capitalist or democratic
Instead, China has dominated key sectors while eroding US industry, and so
Trump ran on a platform of using tariffs to tackle that imbalance.
And while he’s now slapped tariffs on everyone (otherwise he says China just reroutes via third countries),
the big kahuna tariffs are now really on China
. Building on earlier tariff rounds during Trump 1.0 and Biden…
Trump’s 34% tariffs last week have now triggered a 34% response from Xi Jinping, in turn triggering another
50%
addition from Trump.
The cumulative result is that as of today (Wednesday), the world’s largest economy is now slapping the world’s second-largest economy with
104% tariffs
. And the second-largest economy is responding with its own historic 52% tariffs.
But as spicy as this all sounds, it’s worth having a clear picture of what it all means for…
The big end of town
For the US
, one reason the S&P 500 just posted its
biggest intraday reversal in history
is that major US firms depend on China, whether as a source of inputs, consumers, or both. Many have
dual
dependence, like Apple still manufacturing 90% of its iPhones and generating 17% of its revenue in China, hence the firm’s 20%+ stock crash since last week.
There are similar stories for China
, which is (just in numerical terms) about four times more reliant on exports to the US than vice versa: some firms (like Lenovo and ByteDance) have that same double-dependence above. Meanwhile…
The smaller end of town
In the US, for example, Virginia’s
Sarah Wells
(who makes accessories for moms) has
paused
hiring now that Trump’s tariffs have wiped her margins — local suppliers can’t fill her orders, and she still needs Chinese raw materials anyway. There are
countless other such tales
, like California’s big machine toolmaker who’s just
slashed
production.
Of course, the argument is
US suppliers can eventually step in
, but ‘eventually’ might be years off, by which point some of these same US businesses may no longer be around to click ‘buy’, or not at the higher prices US suppliers will need. And sure, others like commercial shrimpers
welcome
Trump’s tariffs after years of battling cheap imports, but shrimp victories will be dwarfed by soy losses, as farmers
brace
to lose
half
their exports.
Over in China
, meanwhile, up to 10 million manufacturing jobs are now at risk as US-dependent exporters crater. And social media is awash with anecdotes, whether it’s the Jiangsu textile worker losing shifts, or the Guangdong assembly line guy bracing for ruin.
Of course, the argument is that many of these
jobs were created at US expense
, though it’s unclear if there are still millions of Americans wanting that factory work, let alone wanting to pay quadruple for a tee (notwithstanding some local cost-effective options).
So, what’s next?
Trump is
assuring everyone
Xi will make a deal, though it’ll have to be fast while the pain spreads across the US economy.
And yet while China’s foreign ministry is
vowing
to “
fight to the end
”, Xi Jinping is in a bind, too: his legitimacy rests partly on a Communist Party promise to keep lifting local living standards, but millions of layoffs will worsen his economic woes, while running cap in hand to Trump could just risk new political woes among his Beijing elites.
So markets will keep shuddering while the world watches to see who’ll blink first.
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
Trump’s 2024 campaign united different US tribes, but they’re now back in conflict:
Capitalists
hoped Trump’s pro-business tilt would turbocharge growth, while
Isolationists
hoped Trump’s populist-nationalist instincts would help repair some of the disruption left behind by a generation of globalisation.
By implementing historic new tariffs, Trump has now sided with his isolationists like Navarro, nudging more capitalist voices like Musk to publicly call Navarro a moron. It’s also why we’ve already flagged the possibility that
Trump might fire Navarro
.
Anyway, there’s a quiet sense among many foreign policy types that
Trump 1.0 was right
to diagnose the US imbalance with China. The yelling has been more about
his methods
: Biden used a scalpel (targeted tariffs, industrial policy), while Trump has now dropped a sledgehammer (the highest US tariffs in a century).
And will this work?
The markets are still flashing a big red ‘no’. In addition to record falls in stocks, remember the claims this might all drive yields down to help refinance US debt? We’ve just seen the opposite, with
US yields spiking
higher
, signalling either:
a) This might just be another big unwinding of the
basis trade
(a common hedge fund bet on the price gap between Treasuries and futures)
b) The US might now be
losing its safe-haven appeal
, and/or
c) The markets might fear
stagflation
ahead (slow growth and high inflation).
If it’s more a combination of b) or c), that’ll prompt fears that Trump might’ve just pulled a Liz Truss.
Also worth noting:
Total trade in goods between the US and China amounted to $585B in 2024.
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇰🇷
South Korea
: About 10 North Korean soldiers
crossed the demarcation line this week
, prompting warning shots from the South. Seoul is saying this latest encroachment (in a wooded area) seems to have been accidental.
🇦🇱
Albania
: Italy has gifted fellow NATO member Albania an 80s-era warship to help
beef up its patrolling capabilities
. Rome previously used the ship to transfer irregular migrants to Albania under a deal Italian courts scrapped last year.
🇹🇭
Thailand
: Authorities have arrested an American academic at Thailand's Naresuan University on charges of
insulting the Thai monarchy
. If found guilty, he could face up to 15 years in jail.
🇩🇴
Dominican Republic
: The roof of a nightclub in Santo Domingo has
collapsed
, resulting in at least 98 dead and another 150 injured. The club, Jet Set, has long been popular among prominent athletes, artists, and politicians, with several high-profile victims already identified.
🇪🇹
Ethiopia
: Ethiopia has appointed an interim leader in its restive Tigray region in an
attempt to defuse tensions
after secessionists there fought a 2020-2022 war. The new guy was a top commander fighting federal troops during the war.
FROM OUR SPONSORS
Prepare for a Lifetime of Adventure with Rosetta Stone
There’s no better gift this spring season than a lifetime of opportunity. Rosetta Stone’s Lifetime Unlimited plan grants forever access to 25 languages, making it the perfect present. Whether it’s for the traveler eager to immerse themselves in local cultures or the lifelong learner ready for a new challenge, this gift stands out as both thoughtful and practical. Normally, it is $399, but this spring sale is available for just $149.
Claim Lifetime Access for $149.
EXTRA INTRIGUE
The Intrigue jobs board
💼
Part-time Education Officer
@
Guardian Foundation
in London
Manager, Investor Relations
@
Anduril
in Costa Mesa, California
Intern, Programs and Engagement
@
Munich Security Conference
in Berlin
Manager Marketing, Industry Relations & Partnerships
@
Netflix
in Seoul
FLIGHT OF THE DAY
Credits: SAS.
This past Saturday, passengers arrived at Copenhagen Airport ready to board a flight on SAS, Scandinavia’s leading airline. Nothing unusual about that, except none of them had any idea where they were headed, beyond the
‘Unknown Location’
printed on their ticket.
It’s all part of a promotion the airline offers its members, who can buy these mystery flights using their frequent flyer miles. Last year’s mystery flight (to Athens) was a hit, so another
1000 registrants signed up
within minutes of this year’s announcement.
Their mystery destination? Seville, Spain (folks returned home yesterday).
DAILY POLL
Who do you think will blink first?
🇨🇳 Xi Jinping
🇺🇸 Donald Trump
❌ Neither
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
How long do you think these next US-Iran talks will last?
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️
🤝
Until there's a deal (38%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
⚔️ Until there's a war  (53%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write us!) (9%)
Your two cents:
🤝
J.G:
“I think Iran would take a deal, but what’s the enforcement mechanism?”
⚔️ P.F:
“Both sides believe strongly they are right. Nuclear weapons are an all or nothing thing.”
✍️ J.C:
“I don’t know about a war. However I wouldn’t be surprised if they get a couple doses of bunker busting bombs to show the Iranians what an outcome might be like.”
✍️ O.X:
“My guess is they're over before they start. Two unreliable negotiating partners don't make for a high chance of success.”
Was this forwarded to you? We're a team of ex-diplomats producing a concise and engaging geopolitical briefing for 120k+ leaders each day.
It’s free to subscribe
.