URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/trump-s-gaza-plan-gets-the-un-tick
Title: 🌍 Trump’s Gaza plan gets the UN tick

Today’s briefing:
— Trump’s Gaza plan gets the UN tick
— Go join a development bank in Greece
— Don’t
dare
do that to Italy
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. The Middle East is no stranger to hosting stabilisation missions (to varying degrees of success), be they the Multinational Force and Observers in the Sinai, the UN Disengagement Observer Force in the Golan, or the OG UN Truce Supervision Organization headquartered in Jerusalem (which had been, back in my day, a plum post for retiring military brass).
But few of these organisations will have as tough a mandate as
Gaza’s newly-approved International Stabilisation Force (ISF)
, which will use "
all necessary measures
" to demilitarise Gaza, dismantle non-state armed groups' infrastructure, protect civilians and humanitarian operations, secure border areas, and train a vetted Palestinian police force.
The ISF will have its work cut out for it, as we’ll see in our top story today.
Number of the day
427-1
That’s how the House voted to release 20,000+ pages relating to Jeffrey Epstein after President Trump suddenly dropped his objections. Now that the Senate has given its unanimous approval, Trump has promised to sign this bill into law, though the justice department still has scope for broad national security redactions.
Israeli-Palestinian peace
After weeks of haggling, the UN Security Council (UNSC) has approved the US-led plan for post-war Gaza, with 13 in favour, two abstentions (Russia/China), and none against.
In short,
Resolution 2803 (2025)
endorses:
Trump’s ‘
Board of Peace
’ overseeing
Palestinian technocrats to initially run Gaza
An
International Stabilisation Force
(ISF) to secure the strip
The gradual
withdrawal of Israeli forces
to a “
security perimeter
” in Gaza, and
The “
full resumption”
of
aid
overseen not by Israel or Hamas, but the Board of Peace.
The Security Council authorised it all at least
through the end of 2027
, with the US now hustling to get the ISF into Gaza as soon as January.
In the meantime, here are the
four biggest questions
you need to know:
Who’s on the Board of Peace?
President Trump says he’ll chair, and Tony Blair’s name is in the mix as another member, though Blair’s stint dragging the UK into Iraq makes him (ahem) a controversial pick.
Trump says
he’ll announce the Board
— featuring “
the most powerful and respected leaders throughout the world
” — in coming weeks. Negotiations are likely still underway, though UNSC endorsement will now push some initial “
maybes
” into the “
yes
” column.
From Trump’s perspective, getting the
biggest names
onboard will maximise the plan’s credibility, buy-in, and therefore chances of success. But success also depends a lot on…
Who will deploy troops to Gaza?
This is a chicken-egg situation, with no obvious exit:
Hamas
is refusing to disarm, and linking any foreign troops to Israeli occupation
Azerbaijan
is saying it’ll only send troops once the fighting stops
Indonesia
’s troops will only help with aid and reconstruction, and
Israel
is vetoing any military presence from regional rival Turkey.
So…
who’s actually going to stare Hamas down?
Israel’s two brutal years of war couldn’t fully dislodge Hamas, so will this ISF fare any better?
Arab/Muslim forces would enjoy the most
legitimacy
, though it was several same nations who were among the most vocal critics of Israel’s own Hamas war. So what happens when their own soldiers now return home in a body bag? Or cause more Gazan civilian deaths?
It’s a massive military, reputational, and political risk for any nation volunteering troops. That might be why the Emiratis are already declining (though they flagged
legal
doubts).
And even if this ISF reaches the combat strength necessary to disarm Hamas, then…
What happens after two years?
The idea is for the ISF to eventually hand Gaza’s administration back to the secular-nationalist Palestinian Authority (which ran Gaza pre-Hamas, and is still in the West Bank).
That unelected Authority (
the PA
) — deeply unpopular among Palestinians — has committed to a bunch of reforms and even elections to boost its credibility and effectiveness in time to resume control in Gaza. But even if you consider two years is like half a century in Middle East geopolitical years, is even that enough time for…
the PA to rebuild?
the ISF to disarm Hamas? and/or…
Egypt to train and vet an entirely new police force…?
So there’s a risk this arrangement keeps getting rolled over, a
little
like the UN’s support for Palestinian refugees way back in 1949, now extended as the UNRWA every three years…
~25 times!
And if this Plan
does
need the Security Council to approve extensions, then we must ask…
Why did Russia and China abstain?
Their
official reasons
(
here
and
here
) are that the plan is
a
) too vague,
b
) sidelines Palestinians,
c
) skips (at Israel’s urging) any clear commitment to a two-state solution, and
d
) cedes too much power to a new, non-UN body.
But you can bet both missions also weighed up some
unofficial reasons
, like a preference not to contribute to a US win. Similarly, the more the US is tied up in Gaza, the less the US can focus on (say) Putin’s invasion of Ukraine, or Xi’s ambitions over Taiwan.
Anyway, the costs of blocking Trump’s plan — particularly with key players onboard — were clearly outweighed by the benefits of just waving it through, then maybe crowing “
told you so
” down the track. But will they reach the same calculation in 2027, 2029, or 2031…?
Intrigue’s Take
We’ve explored this war and any possible exits a bunch of times over the years, but there’s actually some broader significance for the UN itself here.
First
, the fact everyone wanted UNSC signoff before going beyond Gaza’s initial ceasefire is a signal the UN still holds the
moral authority
and political legitimacy capitals crave.
Second
, the fact the UNSC agreed on a massive new course of action is a signal the UN
can still be effective
, particularly after years of gridlock over (say) whether to even mention the Hamas attacks, or use the word “
ceasefire
”, “
pause
”, or “
truce
”.
Of course, whether or not either of the above two positive points might now nudge the US back to paying its UN dues is another question entirely. To the contrary, this might actually hint at
where the UN is headed
: towards a leaner future dispensing / withholding legitimacy, while leaving actual implementation to member states.
But back to where we started: this particular UNSC-endorsed plan is clearly imperfect, but it’s also clearly the closest we’ve come to breaking a miserable cycle.
So keep an eye on the next two big steps: who’s on the Board, and who sends troops.
Sound even smarter:
Algeria is currently the Security Council’s only Arab member — it negotiated on behalf of the broader Arab group of nations.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇷🇺
RUSSIA
-
Secret talks?
The US and Russia are reportedly holding secret talks to end Putin’s war on Ukraine, with a draft 28-point plan loosely inspired by Trump’s Gaza plan (see above). It’s unclear how much Ukraine or broader Europe are in the loop here. (
Axios
$)
Comment
: Meanwhile, the price of Urals crude (Russia’s main export blend) has plunged to ~$36 per barrel (compared to ~$60 last month) ahead of a looming 21 November deadline for tough new US sanctions. Putin’s break-even price is now above $70, so these sanctions are hurting.
🇸🇦
SAUDI ARABIA
-
5 stars on TripAdvisor.
The crown prince has wrapped his White House visit with news that President Trump is designating the kingdom a ‘major non-Nato ally’, paving the way for the US to sell the Saudis F-35 fighter jets (something we
explored
yesterday). But the prince told reporters he still wants a clear path to a two-state solution before he recognises Israel via Trump’s Abraham Accords. (
The Hill
)
Comment
: This updated pact (including more Saudi cash, and an affirmation of the US as the kingdom’s top partner) is a big deal. But the lingering memory might be Trump claiming (contrary to US intel) the prince played no role in the Khashoggi assassination, or seemingly implying the Washington Post columnist had it coming.
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
Oops.
Domestic state-run outlets are blaming unspecified tourists for a fire at a vast temple in Zhangjiagang, citing
“irresponsible”
use of candles and incense. (
The Straits Times
)
🇬🇧
UNITED KINGDOM
-
The job app.
The spycatchers at MI5 have warned British lawmakers that China’s intelligence officers are posing as LinkedIn recruiters to lure them. (
CNN
)
Comment:
This technique isn’t news (China’s MSS has also used LinkedIn fronts to offer us lucrative ✌️consultancies✌️ over the years — we accepted just joking). What’s more newsworthy is the prospect of using such a blunt method to try recruiting an actual member of parliament. Though as in all of China’s espionage, it’s often a raw numbers game — most targets will ignore, but you only need one bite.
🇱🇦
LAOS
-
Royal treatment.
Japan’s princess (23) has begun a tour in Laos, celebrating 70 years of diplomatic relations. (
Nikkei
)
Comment:
While technically above government, countries typically shape these royal visits to maximise geopolitical outcomes. In this case, Tokyo is likely hoping to make headway in a country firmly within the orbit of rival China (though Japan also has a long history of supporting Laos).
🇧🇷
BRAZIL
-
Sentenced.
Brazil’s top court has jailed high-ranking military officers and a federal agent for up to 24 years for plotting a coup and planning to assassinate President Lula, as part of the sprawling case that already convicted a former leader (Bolsonaro). (
AP
)
Comment:
This is unlikely to derail America’s quiet de-escalation of its Bolsonaro-linked tariffs — the US president just
rolled back
several on inflation grounds.
🇲🇿
MOZAMBIQUE
-
Court documents.
Human rights groups are accusing France’s TotalEnergies of complicity in 2021 war crimes by security forces protecting their multibillion dollar LNG project, after ISIS-linked insurgents reportedly killed or kidnapped 1,500 locals. The firm denies the allegations, which are now being examined by French prosecutors. (
BBC
)
Comment:
Total says it’s still proceeding with the project, which was once the single largest foreign investment in Africa. Still, this news will complicate President Chapo’s efforts to convince majors to revive other stalled projects. And coming the same month as another French industrial giant (Lafarge) faces trial for allegedly paying off jihadis in Syria (!), it’s a reminder of the perils of doing business in a conflict zone.
Extra Intrigue
The Intrigue jobs board
💼
Program Director, Public Opinion and Foreign Policy
@
Lowy Institute
in Sydney
Senior Officer, Comms
@
Black Sea Trade and Development Bank
in Thessaloniki
Program Coordinator
@
Gates Foundation
in Beijing
Data Science Senior Program Officer
@
Science for Africa Foundation
in Nairobi
Controversy of the day
Credits: Francesco Lollobrigida’s Facebook
This week’s political drama in Brussels isn’t about Putin’s war, or China’s trade, or the continent’s irregular immigration, or even the EU’s own budget.
No, dear Intriguer. The European Parliament is directing the full force of its taxpayer-funded might towards
**checks notes**…
carbonara.
That’s right. During a stroll through the European Parliament’s in-house supermarket, Italian Agriculture Minister Francesco Lollobrigida reportedly froze in horror at the sight of
“Italian style”
goodies not hailing from Italy. But what really screeched his metaphorical Vespa tires to a halt was a jar of Belgian-made carbonara sauce.
So really putting the LoL in his Lollobrigida surname, the minister went public (on
Facebook
no less) demanding an immediate investigation. With a bit of help from Italian lawmakers in Strasbourg, the issue has now landed on the desk of parliamentary leader Roberta Metsola.
Today’s poll
Do you think this UN-backed plan for Gaza will work?
👍 Yes, it's now got the necessary backing
👎 No, it doesn't address the root causes
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Which jet would you buy?
🇫🇷
Rafale (6%)
🇺🇸
F-35 (63%)
🇨🇳
J-35 (7%)
🇪🇺
Eurofighter (13%)
🇷🇺
Su-57 (3%)
✍️ Other (write us!) (8%)
Your two cents:
🇺🇸
E.K.H:
“Although I wonder, how much better is the F-35 really than the previous generation? And is it worth the expense? Seems like you could get as much bang for a lot less buck with several F-16s and F-22s.”
🇸🇪
L.M:
“Gripen. The Swedes are wooing us Canadians. I'm good with that. I'd rather get into fighter-bed with the Swedes any day than the Americans.”
🇨🇳
P.F:
“Give me a J-35 so I could trade it to the US (inspection) for two F-35s.”
✍️ G.K:
“None. The Ukraine/Russia war has shown us the future: drones, missiles, robots and likely next in line: lasers.”