URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/trump-and-xi-talk-for-first-time-c6d8e8078c9e11d6
Title: 🌍 Trump and Xi talk for first time

Today’s briefing:
— Xi, Trump call.
— World Bank’s pivot.
— The OG Birkin.
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Unless you managed to stay off the internet yesterday, you would have no doubt seen the biggest bromance breakup of 2025 between US President Trump and Elon Musk. Watching the whole thing unfold was more drama-filled than any season finale on reality TV.
As the two engaged in increasingly spicy tit-for-tat swipes, I couldn’t help but wonder how this latest episode will play out on the global financial markets. Either way, bring out the popcorn.
And for today’s story, we’ll dive into a different and budding bromance, this time between Chinese President Xi Jinping and US President Donald Trump.
Number of the day
1 A.M.
That's the time air raid alerts began across Ukraine last night as Russia launched drone and missile attacks towards the country, just days after Kyiv's 'Operation Spider Web.’
Keeping up with the Karda-Xi-ans
Sometimes, the shortest press releases generate the most headlines.
Take Thursday’s
press release
from China’s state broadcaster:
“Chinese President Xi Jinping on Thursday held phone talks with U.S. President Donald Trump at the latter's request.”
As you’d expect, given the feverish geopolitical climate of today, those 18 words were enough to trigger a visceral reaction in any US-China watcher.
Here’s what you need to know about the Xi-Trump call.
It lasted around 90 minutes, and was described by Trump as a “
very good phone call
”. This was the first direct contact between the two leaders since Donald Trump’s return to office, and the Chinese Foreign Ministry was quick to point out the call was organised at Trump’s request.
What did they talk about?
Trade
- Predictably, this was the top priority for both presidents. The two pledged to implement the trade truce they agreed to following talks in Geneva last month, with Xi exhorting Trump to remove the “
negative measures
” imposed on China. The two leaders also agreed to
continue trade negotiations
, with delegations to meet “
shortly
”
Rare earth minerals
- According to President Trump, the two cleared the air on China’s export curbs, stating “
there should no longer be any questions respecting the complexity of Rare Earth products
”, (we’re not entirely sure of what this means in practice)
Chinese students
- Xi also brought up the issue of US student visas for Chinese nationals. Following the call, Trump told journalists it’s an “
honour
” to have Chinese students in the US
Taiwan
- The Chinese
readout
(
🇨🇳
) also mentions Xi warned the US of handling the issue of Taiwanese independence “
prudently
” to avoid it dragging the two powers
“into a dangerous situation of conflict and confrontation
”.
And like any estranged friends, Xi and Trump ended the call promising to
visit one another
.
Why is this important?
This call comes at a
crucial juncture for China-US ties
(and the whole world). Last week, the two biggest economies accused one another of breaching the terms of the Geneva trade consensus. All the while, European and US auto suppliers are
sounding the alarm
their supply chains will soon be hit if China doesn’t loosen its export curbs on rare earth minerals and magnets.
The Xi-Trump call thus draws a line under their most recent spat, cooling down the inflammatory tones coming out of Beijing and DC. And while we’re no closer to a trade deal, we’re maybe a little further away from the edge.
Intrigue’s Take
World leaders have developed distinct strategies for how to deal with President Donald J. Trump.
German Chancellor Friedrich Merz, who met the US President in the Oval Office yesterday, emerged unscathed - nay, thrilled - from the encounter by choosing to yield the spotlight to his host and emphasising the shared objective of ending the Russo-Ukraine War, while avoiding any finger-pointing.
Xi has taken a different approach, playing hard-to-get and avoiding requests for direct calls or meetings with the US president in an effort to up the pressure on Washington and avoid a possible embarrassing dressing down
a la
Zelensky.
From what we’ve heard here in DC, the only real thing that matters for Trump on any agreement with China is landing a good deal on fentanyl.
Sound even smarter:
Earlier this week, the OECD
downgraded its global growth forecast
for the year, blaming trade disruptions and an uncertain economic outlook.
A day before their call, the US President took to social media to lament it was “
extremely hard to make a deal
” with Chinese President Xi Jinping.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇱🇧
LEBANON  — Israel targets Lebanese capital.
Israel carried out air strikes in the southern suburbs of Beirut late yesterday (Thursday) night, saying they were targeting Hezbollah's drone production on the eve of Eid Al Adha, a major Islamic holiday. (
Al Jazeera
)
Comment:
Lebanon’s newly elected President Joseph Aoun “strongly condemned” the attacks, but Aoun’s ability to navigate between the West’s desire to disarm Hezbollah (countries who backed his run) and keep Israel at bay comes to a head with such strikes.
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES — Tesla loses millions.
After Trump and Musk began to spat online, Tesla stocks sank 14%, wiping off $150B in market value yesterday (Thursday) and SpaceX’s $22B in government contracts are now at risk. (
Reuters
)
Comment:
MAGA advisor Steve Bannon, and arch-foe to Musk, has
called
for all of the billionaire’s companies’ contracts with the US to be cancelled, and even told Trump to consider deporting the South African native (who is a naturalised US citizen).
🇨🇳
CHINA — Business clash.
In the once Japan-occupied port city of Dalian, in China, two Japanese business men were killed last month after a dispute with a professional counterpart, marking a violent escalation in the city with strong Japan ties. (
Kyodo News
)
Comment:
Japanese media invests heavily in covering Dalian, with most outlets having a correspondent there and relaying information on the community back to Tokyo and beyond. Such violence can cause people-to-people relations to sour.
🇪🇺
EUROPEAN UNION
-
Lagarde to stay.
European Central Bank President Christine Lagarde said that she would be serving out her term in its entirety, ending in 2027, after rumours spread that she would potentially replace Klaus Schwab as head of the World Economic Forum. Meanwhile, the ECB announced it was cutting its benchmark rate to 2%.  (
Politico
)
🇻🇳
VIETNAM
-
More children welcome.
Hanoi is lifting a two-child policy in the Southeast Asia country as declining birth rates force a demographic crunch in the country, despite the policy rarely being implemented. (
The Straits Times
)
🇭🇹
HAITI
-
Cash needed to solve dire hunger.
The World Food Program, the UN’s top food agency, is appealing for $46M in urgent funding to supply food to around 2 million Haitians on the brink of starvation. (
AP
)
🇺🇬
UGANDA
-
World Bank pulls U-turn.
Nearly two years ago, the World Bank put a ban on loans to Uganda, citing draconian anti-LGBTQ laws passed in the country, but recently decided to lift its curb, saying it “
cannot deliver on its mission
” if some countries are excluded. (
BBC
)
Extra Intrigue
Intrigue’s Weekend Recommendations
Watch
: Catch up on our
latest interview
with none other than Pulitzer-Prize winner Anne Applebaum on all things autocrats and disinformation.
Read
: The
US-Africa relationship is shifting
from development-led to one focused on strategic minerals, security, and multipolarity.
Listen
: To the new season of
The Outlaw Ocean
, a podcast that mixes investigative journalism and the inescapable tug of the deep waters.
Bag of the day
Credits: Sotheby’s.
Recognise that bag above?
The luxury connoisseurs amongst us will have instantly identified it as an Hermes Birkin. Why are you reading about a $40K bag on Intrigue? Well, luxury bags have landed more than one world leader in a pickle. Just last year, the ex-South Korean President was roiled by a scandal brought on by his wife's Dior bag, and let’s not forget about the OG, Imelda Marcos’ impressive handbag collection.
Now, where were we? Oh, yes, we’re here to let you know that the
original
Birkin bag, designed for the late Jane Birkin after she said she wanted a bag
“half the size of her suitcase”,
will be auctioned by Sotheby’s on 10 July. Just in case you were looking to do some bidding.
Friday Quiz
It’s 6 June, or D-Day!
Which beach was part of the D-Day landings?
Omaha
Normandy
Stalingrad
Calais
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
What was the codename for the overall D-Day operation?
Operation Torch
Operation Overlord
Operation Sea
Operation Manstein
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Which major city was liberated as a direct result of D-Day?
Berlin
Toulouse
Paris
Reims
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate