URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/turkeys-election-heads-runoff
Title: 🌍 Turkey's election heads to a runoff

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Counting to 10,000 takes about two hours (so we’ve heard). Writing 10,000 in Roman numerals comes out as a tasty MMMMMMMMMM (or X̅ for short). And… 10,000 is also how many new folks have joined the Intrigue family since just last week! We’re chuffed to have each one of you on this adventure with us, helping to make sense of our world.
Today’s briefing is a 4.8 min read:
🇹🇷
Turkey
’s election goes to a run-off.
🇿🇦
The US accuses
South Africa
of selling arms to Russia.
➕
Plus:
Some Eurovision stats, how the papers are covering the appointment of a new Twitter CEO, and some surprising vending machines now booming in Germany.
🎧
Today’s Intrigue Outloud:
Greece has lost its marbles!
Listen here!
🗺️ AROUND THE WORLD
🇹🇭
Thailand
: Voters rejected military rule in
Thailand’s elections
yesterday (Sunday), with military-backed parties winning only a fraction of seats in parliament. Lawmakers (including a Senate appointed by the military) will now convene in July to elect a new prime minister.
🇱🇮
Liechtenstein
: Bitcoin will soon be
accepted as payment for certain government services
in Liechtenstein. Under the new policy, payments will be converted immediately into Swiss francs because of Bitcoin’s continued volatility.
🇵🇬
Papua New Guinea
(PNG)
: Foreign Minister Justin Tkatchenko announced plans to resign on Friday (12 May) after public uproar over the cost and size of
PNG’s delegation to King Charles’ coronation
.
🇺🇾
Uruguay
: The capital city of Montevideo is
subsidising water bottles
for its residents amid an historic three-year drought. The country received 60% less rainfall over the last year than average.
🇱🇾
Libya
: French prosecutors are re-opening a case against former president Nicolas Sarkozy for allegedly
soliciting millions of dollars
from then Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi. Prosecutors say Sarkozy used the money to fund his victorious 2007 presidential campaign.
🇹🇷
TURKEY | ELECTION
Turkey heads to an election runoff
Briefly:
Turkey’s highly anticipated presidential election will likely
go to a run-off on 28 May
, with initial results from the first round yesterday (Sunday) showing no candidate with the 50% of votes necessary to win outright.
Some polls had hinted that incumbent strongman President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan could lose, but he ended up with 49.2% of the vote, compared with 45% for opposition leader Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu (pronounced
kilitch-dah-rolu
).
Why’s everyone so focused on Turkey’s election?
⚔️ It’s got NATO’s second largest military
🧑‍🤝‍🧑
It’s home to more than 88 million people
🌍 It straddles Europe, Asia and the Middle East, and
🥾
This is the closest Erdoğan has come to losing power
And why’s Erdoğan faced such a tough election?
📉
Erdoğan’s unorthodox policies have contributed to a currency collapse and soaring inflation, with many Turks now struggling, and
✊
Erdoğan’s critics say the populist leader has weakened Turkey’s institutions and steered the country away from its secular roots
So… any change in Ankara could be felt around the world. The thing is, we don’t really know
how
. The opposition contains nationalist, leftist and conservative parties, so its vision for Turkey’s role in the world isn’t always entirely clear.
Intrigue’s take:
Erdoğan has long been a tough and wily negotiator on the international stage (just ask Sweden, whose NATO membership he’s vetoed). So, several world leaders will have hoped to see the back of him at this election.
But the opposition now has a tough slog to close that gap before 28 May. So betting markets are
wagering
Erdoğan’s time on the world stage isn’t over yet.
Also worth noting:
Voter turnout came in at around 88% yesterday. That compares to 84% in the last Swedish election, and around 67% in the UK and the US.
To go deeper on what’s at stake in this election, we highly recommend
this episode
of
One Decision
with Julia Macfarlane, featuring Sir Richard Dearlove (former MI6 chief), David Satterfield (former US Ambassador to Turkey) and Gonul Tol (Turkish academic and author).
📰
GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES
How different newspapers covered
: The appointment of Linda Yaccarino as the next Twitter CEO.
Links
:
Times of India
,
The Guardian
,
Vanguard
.
Today’s briefing is sponsored by
The Daily Upside
It’s time to rethink your media diet.
Most financial media businesses are built with one singular goal — convert financial insecurity and fear into clicks. And the headlines do just that — “9%+ inflation is eating away at your savings,” “Soaring interest rates have wiped $4 trillion from equity markets.”
None of it is designed to make you a smarter investor or sharper business person. Fortunately, we have The Daily Upside. This free newsletter is a veritable goldmine of deep insights, unbiased reporting, and is packed with color. Founded by a team of wall street insiders, bankers, and scholars, The Daily Upside delivers industry-level analysis with absolutely zero BS. Join over 900,000 subscribers — including the team at International Intrigue — who trust The Daily Upside every day. We couldn’t recommend it enough.
Subscribe here.
🇿🇦
SOUTH AFRICA | GEOPOLITICS
US ambassador accuses South Africa of arming Russia
Briefly:
The US ambassador to South Africa has said he’s “confident” the country has
sold weapons and ammunition to Russia
, despite its pledged neutrality. The arms were allegedly loaded onto a sanctioned Russian ship in December.
Curiously
, South African officials
claim
the ambassador has since apologised for his remarks, while the ambassador
says
he only corrected “misimpressions”.
And interestingly
, South Africa says it never “approved”, nor has “any record of”, an arms sale to Russia. We don’t want to get all Ally McBeal on you here, but that’s not
quite
the same as saying the sale never happened.
Intrigue’s take:
In the end, this might be one of those situations where the truth lands somewhere in the middle: e.g., perhaps an
unauthorised
arms sale occurred without Pretoria’s knowledge, such as via a rogue element of the military.
In the meantime, both sides agree on one thing: a sanctioned Russian ship
was
docked at a South African military port in December. And a retired judge is now leading
South Africa’s investigation
into what exactly it was doing there.
Also worth noting:
After the
allegations
surfaced, South Africa’s president spoke with the presidents of both
Russia
and
Ukraine
.
An arms sale to Russia would likely breach South Africa’s own Arms Control Act, which bans arms sales to
"states engaged in… aggression"
.
The South African Rand plunged to a record low against the dollar after the US ambassador made the allegations.
👀
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Your weekly roundup of the funniest news from the four corners of the internet!
An Australian woman managed to survive five days in the bush on only
some candy and a bottle of wine
Two French police were despatched to resolve a neighbourly
quarrel about noisy frogs
Ukraine’s first lady received her coronation invitation complete with a
‘Ukaine’ typo
US police responded to a call for help only to find out it was just a
goat bleating
Sausage vending machines
are booming in Germany (and next door, Switzerland has
cheese
vending machines that do pretty well too)
📊
CHART OF THE DAY
Congratulations Sweden!
Here at Intrigue Media we love the Eurovision song contest and we’re not alone: at its peak, 11 million people tuned into Saturday’s final, making Eurovision one of the most watched non-sporting events worldwide.
🗳️ POLL TIME!
Who was your favourite act at this year's Eurovision?
🇸🇪 Sweden
🇫🇮 Finland
🇮🇱 Israel
🇮🇹 Italy
🇳🇴 Norway
✍️ Other (write in!)
😴 I didn't tune in
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Thursday’s poll:
Which country has the best food in the world?
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇨🇳
China
🥟
(4%)
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇫🇷
France
🥐
(15%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇮🇳
India
🍛
(11%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🇮🇹
Italy
🍝
(33%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇵🇪
Peru 🐟 (3%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇯🇵
Japan
🍣
(11%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇪🇹
Ethiopia
🍲
(1%)
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🇲🇽
Mexico
🌮
(12%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!) (11%)
Your two cents:
✍️
G.S:
“The world has gotten so much smaller, so much so that “international cuisine”, high quality I might add, is available everywhere. I’ve been all over the world and have found fantastic food in every corner.”
Honourable mentions:
Thailand, Palestine, Greece, Turkey, South Korea, the US, and many more!
This was one of our biggest ever polls. Do y’all need to take more lunch breaks?