URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/turkey-goes-nuclear
Title: 🌍 Turkey goes nuclear

Today’s newsletter supported by:
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Every democracy has the occasional nail-biter, but few can match tiny Niue in the Pacific. In 2017, two candidates there each received 19 votes, so the result was decided on a coin toss. The same two candidates then tied
again
in 2020 (on 26 votes), and the incumbent lost on a coin toss.
📢
PS.
Our very own John Fowler is sharing a daily update from the UN in New York this week. Sign up
here
to get it straight to your inbox!
Today’s briefing is a 5 min read:
🇹🇷
Turkey
is going nuclear.
🇨🇳
Another minister goes missing in
China
.
➕
Plus:
A cracking skyline, how the papers are covering the US auto strike, and why you shouldn’t wear Crocs to the G20.
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇰🇷
South Korea
: The US has approved the
sale of 25 additional F-35 fighter jets
to South Korea. The announcement comes after the North Korean and Russian leaders discussed “
possibilities
” for military cooperation last week.
🇽🇰
Kosovo
: Kosovar authorities have
rejected an EU-sponsored plan
to normalise ties with Serbia, after months of negotiations. Both Serbia and Kosovo aspire to join the EU, but that’s unlikely to happen unless the two Balkan nations can normalise ties.
🇹🇭
Thailand
: Chinese tourists will now be able to
vacation in Thailand visa-free
. The policy is aimed at rebooting Thailand’s economy after months of political instability.
🇩🇴
Dominican Republic
: Santo Domingo completely
closed its border with Haiti
on Friday to protest against the construction of a Haitian canal. The Dominican Republic says the canal will divert water from the Massacre River, which the two neighbours share.
🇸🇦
Saudi Arabia
: A Yemeni Houthi delegation headed to Saudi Arabia late last week in an effort to
negotiate a permanent ceasefire
between the two warring sides. The conflict has largely subsided after a UN-brokered truce was negotiated last year.
🇹🇷
Turkey | Nuclear
Turkey goes nuclear
Turkey and China are
reportedly
(
🇹🇷
) in the final stages of their decade-long negotiations to build a nuclear power plant in Turkey.
Russia is already building Turkey’s
first
plant (it’s expected to come online next year). And
South Korea
and Russia are in the mix to build Turkey’s second plant. So this proposed China-built plant would be Turkey’s third.
Ankara has a range of interests at play here
. It wants to:
🛢️ Cut its spending on oil and gas imports ($80B last year)
🌱
Hit its 2053 net zero
target
, while
⚖️ Avoiding becoming reliant on any single energy supplier.
For nuclear exporters
like China, Russia, Korea, and France, it’s all about:
Income
: Russia
says
it now has $200B in foreign orders
Leverage
: Sellers not only lock in lengthy fuel and maintenance contracts, but can continue to
own and operate
the plant itself
Prestige
: Only a few countries have the wherewithal to build plants
Industry
: Some players (like Korea) have limited nuclear demand at home, meaning their industries must grow abroad or die, and
Competition
: It boosts the influence of US rivals (like
🇷🇺
and
🇨🇳
), who contrast their own ability to deliver with that of the West.
So the stakes are high. And these deals are playing out everywhere. Russia
claims
a 70% global market share, with 70 projects (MOUs, research, and full plants) across 30 countries from Rwanda to Bolivia.
Intrigue's take:
NATO doesn’t really prevent members (like Turkey) from partnering with strategic rivals (like Russia and China) on key tech (like nuclear). But this likely Turkey-China deal will play into the ongoing debate around Turkey’s increasingly multi-aligned approach to the world.
And yet the thing is… Turkey is hardly alone. It feels like this same story is playing out on almost every continent, across almost every industry: the brief post-Cold War order is fading away, and capitals are hedging their bets on what’s next.
Also worth noting:
While looking to import nuclear tech from China, Turkey is
exporting
its own drone tech to Taiwan.
Russia supplies half of
global demand
for enriched uranium, including to buyers in the US and Europe. Russian executives are under
sanctions
, but not the Russian nuclear sector itself.
📰
How newspapers covered…
Industrial action by US auto workers
Mumbai, India
“About 13,000 workers go on strike seeking better wages and benefits from Detroit’s three automakers”
London, UK
“Strike pits US auto union in existential struggle over shift to electric vehicles”
Bogotá, Colombia
“Historic auto-sector strike in the US threatens the country’s economy”
Today’s newsletter is supported by
The Economist
You’ve read the news, now understand the implications. At
The Economist
, we provide global reporting and in-depth analysis, exploring why events happen and what they will mean for people, politics, business and the economy.
With expert data journalism, rigorous fact-checking and global thinking at our core,
The Economist
will broaden your worldview while refining your understanding of the events that matter.
Explore more
🇨🇳
China | Politics
Li Shangfu has gone missing
Where’s China’s defence minister?
Li Shangfu, who was only just appointed China’s defence minister in March, hasn’t been seen publicly since 29 August.
Beijing first
blamed
a “
health condition
”
when Li was suddenly unable to meet Vietnamese counterparts earlier this month. And China’s foreign ministry said it was “
not aware of the situation
” when asked late last week.
But US officials now
say
he’s under investigation for corruption
. The details are murky, but Li ran China’s big-spending defence procurement office from 2017 to 2022, so there’s been no shortage of opportunity.
Intrigue’s take:
Li would be China’s 4th general and 2nd minister to get the boot since July. So we feel obliged to paraphrase Oscar Wilde: to lose one official may be regarded as misfortune; to lose five looks like carelessness.
Corruption is an entrenched issue here, so there’s a question whether these officials committed some additional sin (like disloyalty) to land in trouble. But either way, this also raises questions around President Xi himself, like:
his insight (did he not know there were clouds over these officials?)
his judgement (perhaps he knew, but appointed them anyway?)
his effectiveness (is his decade-long corruption drive working?), and
his own position (do these sackings reflect strength or weakness?)
But like so many things in today’s opaque China, the answer is… we don’t know. And these days, uncertainty there means uncertainty everywhere.
Also worth noting:
One analyst
suggests
Li’s removal could enable improved US-China military relations, since Li has been under US sanctions since 2018.
🎧 Today on
Intrigue Outloud
Source: Brookings
Why is the UN so far behind on its goals?
New podcast eps will drop every morning this week at 5am NYC time, with our own John and Ethan sharing the latest from the UN General Assembly.
🎧 Listen here!
➕
Extra Intrigue
Your weekly roundup of the world’s more curious news:
A Portuguese town was
flooded by red wine
after two cisterns holding about 2.2 million litres of liquid burst.
Authorities in the south of China are on the hunt after
70 crocodiles escaped
their enclosure when a typhoon hit.
New Delhi has renewed its temporary
firecracker ban
ahead of the Diwali festival to combat air pollution.
Mexico’s envoy at the G20 has received criticism after turning up
in Crocs
.
A hungry otter in the UK has
eaten $120k worth of fish
from a 4-star hotel’s ponds.
And in Ireland, a ‘
meteor crater
’ turns out to have been dug by beachgoers using toy shovels.
🗳️ Poll time!
Are you following the UN General Assembly this week?
❗ Yes, I'm attending!
🔭 Yes, but from afar
🥱 No, not really interested
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
📸
Photo of the day
The NYC skyline from Central Park. Courtesy of our editor, Ethan
Team Intrigue touched down in the Big Apple yesterday (Sunday) for the 78th annual UN General Assembly. Be sure to subscribe to our special
pop-up newsletter
and follow
Intrigue on Twitter
for all the live updates!
Thursday’s poll:
Do you think the EU should add more members?
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 👍 Yes, the bloc needs to enlarge ASAP (12%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🤔
Yes, but the proper conditions must be met first  (71%)
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 👎 No, there's little the EU would gain  (15%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!) (3%)
Your two cents
:
🤔
F.L:
“Adding more members will increase the economic opportunities for its members and strengthen democracy in Europe. However, it is important for candidates to show that they genuinely support the values of the EU and not just join for the benefits that it provides.”
👎
K:
“Agreement in Europe has been tough since Caesar left Gaul. Don’t think adding more states will make it any easier.”