URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/ukraines-secret-peace-talks
Title: 🌍 Ukraine's secret peace talks

Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Those who know me know I love the weather. Not good weather; in fact, the more extreme, the better (it’s -49℃/-56℉ in Yakutsk, Russia, right now!
🥶
). So, if you’re like me, take some time to explore this
addictive map of global weather
- just don’t blame me if you get nothing else done today.
In today’s briefing
, we look at
a secret meeting
that took place in December in Riyadh (currently 21℃ and sunny, btw) to discuss what peace might look like in Ukraine (-3℃ and overcast).
Also, the New York Times released its always excellent
“52 Places to Go in 2024”
yesterday, so we’ve included a few other tasty morsels we’ve been consuming about the year ahead in travel.
- John Fowler, Co-Founder
If you enjoy International Intrigue, please consider
forwarding this newsletter
to a friend you think would enjoy it. It helps us out a lot! ❤️
TODAY’S NEWS
UK and US repel largest Houthi missile attack
. The US and UK navies shot down over 20 missiles and drones launched by the Houthis against commercial ships in the Red Sea on Tuesday. No damages or injuries were reported, but the intensity of the attack ups pressure on the Biden Administration to secure the international shipping route.
China and US militaries hold first formal talks in years
. The two-day meeting comes after Xi and Biden pledged to resume military communications in November. The Pentagon stressed the importance of such talks “
to prevent competition from veering into conflict
”.
The EU scrutinises Microsoft’s Open AI funding
. The European Commission announced it would investigate whether Microsoft’s $13B investment into the AI company amounts to an unofficial acquisition. The Commission said it would be comparing it to other similar deals.
Gang members storm Ecuador TV studios
. The incursion, which interrupted a live broadcast, caused President Daniel Noboa to declare a state of “
internal armed conflict
”. Violence erupted across the country after news broke that a drug kingpin had escaped prison over the weekend.
The growth ain’t good
.
According to World Bank forecasts, the world economy is on track to experience its worst half-decade growth in 30 years. Global GDP numbers will slow for the third year in a row in 2024, ringing in at 2.4% before slightly improving in 2025.
TOP STORY
Ukraine and its allies held secret peace talks with Global South countries last month
Ukraine, its closest Western allies and a small group of Global South countries held secret peace talks in Saudi Arabia last month, according to a
Bloomberg exclusive
. Discussions focused on Ukraine’s views about possible talks to end the nearly two-year-old war.
The meeting in Riyadh was kept secret
to allow as many countries as possible to attend without political blowback. Representatives from the G7 countries, Saudi Arabia, India, and Turkey showed up, whilst China, Brazil, and the UAE were absent despite being invited. Russia did not receive an invite.
While the meeting didn’t result in a breakthrough
, it signals an adjustment in how Ukraine and its backers are approaching the delicate question of ending the war. Perhaps that’s because things don’t look great for Ukraine right now:
Neither Ukraine nor Russia have made significant military advancements in the last year, and
the frontline is unlikely to change
much in coming months.
Kyiv’s allies are dragging their feet
on providing more economic and military aid. President Zelensky returned from his US fundraising trip last month
emptyhanded
, and the EU is likely to
miss its target
of supplying Ukraine with one million artillery shells by March.
Senior Israeli officials believe the Israeli-Hamas war could
last for another year
, continuing to
divert attention and military support away from Ukraine’s cause.
And elections
in the US, the EU, and the UK in the next 12 months will cause further uncertainty about the medium-to-long-term picture for Ukraine.
Military analyst Jack Watling thinks
the next few months could determine the future trajectory of the war: “
The West, in fact, faces a crucial choice right now: support Ukraine so that its leaders can defend their territory and prepare for a 2025 offensive or cede an irrecoverable advantage to Russia.”
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
Last month’s meeting wasn’t the first time US and EU officials have spoken to their Ukrainian counterparts about what
a peace deal might look like
.
But this time, the broad invite list, along with reports that a group of more than 100 countries have been invited to meet next week in Davos, suggest that Ukraine is trying to
establish the terms
for an acceptable peace deal
before
the Kremlin has a chance to twist the narrative of its invasion.
If a peace deal is to be found - and it’s still a
very
big if - countries like Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Brazil, and India will be needed to convince Russia to accept a deal that is palatable to the Ukrainians. And on the other side, the US and other Ukrainian backers will be essential in persuading Ukraine that stopping the fighting
might
just be the lesser of two evils.
Also worth noting:
Speaking of twisting the narrative,
President Putin recently discussed the possibility of a ceasefire
, but only “
when we [Russia] achieve our goals,
” which includes the
“demilitarization, denazification and neutrality”
of Ukraine.
Share the Intrigue
SUPPORTED BY REVOLUT
One app, all things money.
Banks will charge you when you spend or transfer money abroad. We’re not about that, and that’s why over four million people have switched to Revolut.
Sign up and get Revolut Premium for 3 Months!
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇵🇰
Pakistan
: The country’s Supreme Court has ruled that people with criminal convictions can
stand for election
, clearing the way for former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif to run in the upcoming Pakistani elections. Sharif was removed as PM in 2017 and later convicted on corruption charges.
🇫🇷
France
: Education Minister Gabriel Attal is the new French Prime Minister, and is
the youngest and first openly gay person
to hold the job. President Macron is hoping to revitalise his administration with a high-profile cabinet reshuffle.
🇲🇻
Maldives
: President Mohamed Muizzu
suspended three ministers
after they made disparaging comments about Indian President Narendra Modi. The row has sparked calls to boycott Indian tourism to the Maldives, marking a new low in the bilateral relationship.
🇨🇦
Canada
: Canada’s anti-money laundering agency
now relies on AI
to detect suspicious transactions and fight financial crimes. Think tanks estimate between C$100B and C$130B is laundered in Canada annually.
🇸🇦
Saudi Arabia
: Germany will allow the sale of Eurofighter Typhoon fighter jets to Saudi Arabia. Germany had initially opposed the sale on account of Saudi Arabia’s human rights record, but “
Saudi Arabia’s very constructive attitude toward Israel
" in the current Gaza war changed Berlin’s stance.
EXTRA INTRIGUE
🏝️ What we’re reading about travelling in 2024:
52 Places to Go in 2024 (
New York Times
)
Inuvik festival: Celebrating the sun's return after 30 days of darkness (
BBC
)
Is the world ready for India’s middle class to travel? (
McKinsey
)
“Made in Dubai” is the next global brand (
Skift
)
The Biggest Travel Trends to Expect in 2024 (
CN Traveler
)
Where Did the Snow Go? (
New York Times
)
QUOTE OF THE DAY
South Korea’s lawmakers
unanimously voted yesterday
to make it illegal to breed, kill, sell, or distribute dogs for food. This change comes after years of pressure from inside and outside the country.
The consumption of dog meat in the country has been declining for years. According to a survey by Aware, an animal rights group in Seoul, 93% of adults in South Korea don't plan on eating dog meat in the future, and 82% support the ban.
DAILY POLL
Do you think Ukraine should negotiate with Russia to end the war?
👎 No, there's no negotiating with Putin
👍 Yes, it's time
🤔 Yes, but only under these terms… (write in!)
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think landlocked nations should be granted sea access by their neighbours?
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️ ⛔ No, tough luck (21%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
💸
Yes, but only under strict (and possibly costly) conditions (40%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️
🚢
Yes, trade is good for everyone (36%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!)  (3%)
Your two cents:
✍️
A.B:
“For Strictly trade purposes. Yes for sure. Neighbours country can also benefit from it. (transportation network, tariff free trade and all the perks that come with it).”
💸
V:
“Port access fees. Selected port areas that are leased or partnered. Logistics costs borne by the partner nation.”
⛔
M.A:
“There should be no such obligation; sovereignty is sovereignty.”
✍️
L.S:
“No worries! Rising sea levels should take care of the problem!”
Share the Intrigue!