URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/ukraine-drones-hit-deep-inside-russia-c5bbbb6633f8e757
Title: 🌍 Ukraine drones hit deep inside Russia

Today’s briefing:
— Ukraine’s remarkable drone attack
— US diplo given verbal warning
— Voting in a sports hall?
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. A huge thank you to The Atlantic’s Anne Applebaum who was kind enough to speak with my co-founder Helen Zhang yesterday.
It was a fantastic conversation, focused on Anne’s speciality - autocracy and authoritarian leaders. She had quite a lot to say about Putin and the Russia-Ukraine war (
Ukraine’s remarkable drone attack on Sunday is the topic of our main story today
). We’ll put up a recap and some clips of our chat with Anne soon, so stay tuned.
For anyone keeping track, we’ve spoken with Fareed Zakaria and Anne Applebaum within a week… don’t say we don’t bring you the best of the best! ;)
Number of the day
$200B
That’s how much money Bill Gates has pledged to donate to charity, with a majority of his fortune going towards education and health projects across Africa.
Ukraine hits deep inside Russia
Inside Olenya air base in Russia’s Arctic north on Sunday
, Russian maintenance crews watched helplessly as Ukrainian drones swarmed their billion-dollar bomber fleet. Many of these drones were launched from wooden boxes smuggled across the border  on at least seven trucks over the past 18 months (analysts are still poring over satellite data to piece the details together).
The numbers of ‘Operation Spider Web’ are wild:
117 Ukrainian drones were involved
41 Russian aircraft were targeted (per Ukrainian government sources)
The drones hit targets as far as 4,300 kilometres away from Russia’s border with Ukraine
And Ukrainian sources suggest one-third of Russia’s bomber fleet was badly damaged or destroyed
But here’s the kicker:
the Ukrainian drones (which appear to have been modified from the type of consumer models that normally film weddings) cost ~$500 a pop whereas the Russian Tu-95MS and Tu-22M3 bombers they’re hunting come in somewhere between $40 million and $100 million each (estimates vary).
That’s about a
1:100,000 cost to damage ratio.
Ukraine just proved you can cripple a major power’s air force for the price of a sensible family sedan.
So why does this matter right now?
For the “ceasefire” talks,
this timing is no accident. A Russian delegation was on its way to Istanbul as Ukrainian drones were striking — just 48 hours after Moscow launched its own
record-setting drone attack
.
There’s two ways to read this:
both sides are flexing their military might
to gain leverage before the negotiations, or;
neither side is serious about peace
and won’t be for a while.
While Russia and Ukraine did agree late yesterday to repatriate the bodies of 6,000 dead soldiers and exchange POWs, there was no sign of any broader agreement to end the war, so the smart money’s on the latter explanation.
For Ukraine,
the operation was both a PR win and a legitimate military feat.
Many of the drones were made domestically
, under wartime conditions, with supply chains under constant attack. Remember that Oval Office meeting between Presidents Zelenskyy and Trump? Well, this operation flips that script a bit, showing the world that Ukraine still has “cards to play”, and can innovate and adapt despite facing a richer and more powerful enemy.
For Putin,
it’s a wake-up call that nowhere is safe — not even Siberia. With fighting still occurring inside Russia’s Kursk oblast, exact borders are getting blurrier, and apparently, wooden boxes on trucks can hide some nasty surprises. Intelligence analysts say Operation Spider Web demonstrates just how little control Russia has over its borders.
For defence chiefs around the world,
why commission $50 million bombers when an enemy can take them out with something that costs less than an (admittedly overpriced) Dyson hairdryer?
Intrigue’s Take
Ukraine’s remarkable attack leaves us with (at least) three big questions:
First,
how will Russia retaliate?
Russia has already responded with a series of missile and drone strikes across Ukraine, but Putin has a bigger decision - respond with escalation, or downplay the attack.
Russia’s ability to launch long-range missile attacks has been seriously damaged, so it’ll be under pressure from ultranationalists to escalate, which means we should expect nuclear sabre rattling. A much worse scenario might involve a tactical nuclear “test” which leads us to the ultimate unanswerable question: how would President Trump respond?
Second, could this attack swing the war?
Probably not, but history is full of underestimated military forces delivering unexpected blows that change the course of a war. The US dismissed North Vietnamese tactics until the Tet Offensive, and France thought its Maginot Line would hold until German Panzers simply drove around it. Similarly, if enemy attacks can now come from anywhere, at any time, it’s not too much to suggest this attack could trigger doctrinal rethinking within the Kremlin (and in every capital).
And finally, was this a glimpse into the future of war?
AI-guided drones could change everything. Imagine: $500 consumer drones that can think for themselves, no human pilot needed, smuggled across borders, waiting months for the perfect moment to strike.
The decision to make details of this operation public ensures that Kremlin officials will be nervously wondering how many more Trojan wooden boxes there are across Russia.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
The Dispatch
The Dispatch: For The Silent Majority of Self-Directed Thinkers
Tired of partisan media cheerleading for one team? Start a better news habit and join
The Dispatch
.
Jonah Goldberg and Steve Hayes launched The Dispatch in 2019 to build an enduring presence for original reporting and thoughtful analysis that cuts through the partisan spin to deliver the facts. No insulting clickbait, no false outrage, no annoying auto-play videos—just reliable journalism that prioritizes context, depth, and understanding.
Join half a million loyal readers and start reading The Dispatch today.
International Intrigue readers: Claim your exclusive 30-day, all-access FREE trial today.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇳🇱
NETHERLANDS
-
Government collapses amid migration talks.
Geert Wilders announced Tuesday morning that his party, the anti-immigration populist Party for Freedom (PVV) would withdraw from the governing coalition after failing to convince his coalition partners to back stricter asylum measures. His move will trigger a snap election. (
Politico
)
Comment
: Back in 2023, migration proved to be the downfall of the previous coalition government too.
🇮🇱
ISRAEL
-
Dozens dead amid reports of military shooting near aid centres.
Gaza health officials have accused the Israeli military of shooting into crowds gathered at a new aid distribution centre overnight, in the third such incident in days. The Israeli military denied the accusations and said it fired shots after identifying “
several suspects
”. The UN has heavily criticised the new US and Israel-backed aid distribution system. (
BBC
)
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
Beijing accuses US of “
severely
” violating trade truce.
China has said the US had “
severely violated
” the trade agreement reached last month by placing further export controls on chips and cancelling the visas of Chinese students, warning it would take measures to safeguard its interests. The comments come just days after US President Donald Trump said Beijing had “
totally violated its agreement with us
". (
CBS
)
Comment
: For now, the trade truce holds, and both countries have clear economic incentives to stick with it, but the rhetoric out of Beijing isn’t a good sign.
🇬🇧
UNITED KINGDOM
-
PM unveils new defence strategy.
The UK government has unveiled its latest defence strategy aimed at creating
“a British Army that is 10 times more lethal”
. The plan also includes investment in AI, drones, and defence missile systems. (
Independent
)
Comment
: London’s new strategy comes just days before a NATO defence ministers’ meeting.
🇲🇾
MALAYSIA
-
Local authorities tell farmers to register for durian tracking system.
Authorities in the Malaysian state of Penang have reportedly told durian farmers to register for a fruit tracking system in an effort to combat counterfeit produce. The move is aimed at boosting the Penang durian’s reputation in foreign markets, especially China. (
Bernama
)
Comment:
Durian is reasonably tasty, but in the opinion of at least one of the Intrigue editors, not worth the smell. IYKYK.
🇨🇺
CUBA
-
Havana issues warning to US Chief of Mission.
The Cuban Foreign Ministry has issued a verbal warning to the top US diplomat on the island, Mike Hammer, accusing him of inciting citizens to
“attack the constitutional order”
. Hammer has been travelling across Cuba to meet with dissidents. (
Reuters
)
Extra Intrigue
What people are googling around the world:
🇮🇹
Italians
looked up
‘Etna’
after Europe’s
largest active volcano
started spewing ash.
Folks in
🇰🇪
Kenya
googled
‘
WhatsApp
’
after the messaging app
stopped working
on some older smartphone models.
🇻🇳
Vietnamese
chess fans searched for ‘
Magnus Carlsen
’ after the chess superstar
slammed the table in frustration
after losing to world champion Gukesh Dommaraju.
Election of the day
Credits: Yonhap
Voters in South Korea headed to the polls today (Tuesday)
to vote for a new president after the last one
declared martial law
, revoked it, but got impeached anyway. Sudden onsets of martial law aren’t easily forgotten, it seems.
Photos of election day are flooding South Korean social media, including this picture of a badminton court proudly doing its civic duty by serving as a polling booth.
The results should be known shortly.
Today’s poll
What technology changed warfare forever?
💥 Gun powder
🔫 Machine guns
💻 Radar technology
🏹 Drones
💣 Canons
☢️ Nuclear
✍️ Other (Write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think the rules-based international order will survive the next few years?
👍 Yes, and we've never needed it more (41%)
👎 No, it was already on its last legs  (55%)
✍️ Other (write in!)  (4%)
Your two cents:
👎 C.C:
“Rules are only effective if all participants follow them; unfortunately, the rules have been honored more in the breach than in the upholding. It’s time for a different approach, one that appeals to the innate humanity present in everyone.”
👎 M.P:
“I think that international rules are one of the key ingredients for opposing sides to meet in the middle again.
✍️
F.F:
“It may not, but it definitely should. ”