URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/ukraine-s-two-home-front-fights
Title: 🌍 Ukraine’s two home-front fights

Today’s briefing:
— Ukraine’s two home-front fights
— Korea’s wild teabags
— France won’t let you buy that
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. With temperatures dropping across the northern hemisphere, folks are quietly panicking as they approach the tail end of cuffing season and enter hibernation.
On a serious note though, spare a thought for those in Ukraine now entering their fourth wartime winter. It’s set to be a nasty one, as Russia intensifies its attacks on Ukraine’s energy infrastructure.
But as we’ll see in today’s top story, that’s
not the only trouble that Ukraine is facing, especially as they grapple with issues closer to home
.
P.S.
— Intrigue's 'AI and the World Order'
event at the Australian Embassy in DC
tonight (Thurs) is at full capacity, but if you're keen to attend, hit reply and let us know!
Number of the day
$57 billion
That’s Nvidia’s newly-announced Q3 revenue, a cool ~$2B above market expectations. The semiconductor giant also issued a series of optimistic forecasts for 2026, sending its shares up another 5.4% in early trading.
Eyes on Kyiv
Zelensky and his chief of staff (Yermak)
We’ve kept you in the loop as Ukraine still
barely holds on
to key towns like Pokrovsk, despite Putin burning staggering numbers of casualties there.
But Ukraine’s Zelensky is also grappling with
two threats a little closer to home
.
One
is the White House’s periodic flirting with the idea of imposing a direct Kremlin deal on Ukraine, with word the latest
secret ‘28-point plan’
is again a Putin fever-dream:
Ukraine
would cede even more land, halve its own forces, abandon long-range missiles, lose US support, and ditch its basic right to seek help (eg NATO) while…
Putin
would pinky promise not to attack again (and get sanctions relief for his troubles).
This reported deal (again) just calls for Ukraine’s capitulation, even as Trump now
a
) bleeds out Putin’s economy via new sanctions,
b
) lifts restrictions on Ukraine’s long-range hits, and
c
) bolsters Ukraine’s air defences with Patriot upgrades.
And all that, while Finland’s Alexander Stubb sums up Putin’s own strategic cul-de-sac like this: “
In WWII, Stalin was in Berlin in four years. We're almost four years into the war and Russia is
nowhere near Kyiv
and they're not going to get there.
”
So what’s going on?
Trump’s envoy (Witkoff) accidentally just tweeted a DM seemingly confirming he’s hatching this latest deal with the head of Putin’s beleaguered wealth fund, so there’s a chance it’s
a
) just a Witkoff brain-snap,
b
) just a high-ball to make Ukraine more flexible, or
c
) a fait accompli Trump will impose on Zelensky — outlets are reporting every possibility as fact. We’ll see.
Then
second
, Zelensky is facing
a serious corruption scandal
back home: Ukraine’s corruption watchdog
charged eight suspects
earlier this month over
a mass scheme involving
Energoatom
(Ukraine’s state-owned nuclear power operator).
The suspects include
some big names
, like…
The
co-owner
of Zelensky’s (former) screen production company
Zelensky’s ally and
former deputy
PM, and
Both his justice and energy
ministers
(resigned, though not formally charged).
But the biggest scalp might be a
mysterious ‘Ali Baba’
— that’s the code-name used in some of the above wiretaps for someone else involved in or at least aware of the scheme: and rumour is it could be Zelensky’s own powerful chief of staff, Andriy
Yermak
(he denies it).
So this is all
a yuuuuuuge deal for several reasons
:
Energoatom is one of Ukraine’s most critical wartime institutions
It was allegedly getting milked by some of Ukraine’s most powerful people
They allegedly skimmed not just pennies, but $100M in contract kick-backs
Zelensky had
just
tried to weaken Ukraine’s watchdog until protests erupted
This scandal hits Ukrainian morale right when it’s needed most
It’ll complicate Ukraine’s ongoing EU accession talks
It’s a gift for Putin’s propaganda that Ukraine just isn’t worth helping, and
It’ll embolden Ukraine doubters across the West, just as capitals plan their support ahead of Ukraine’s impending winter.
So it’s any wonder Zelensky has pulled an Obama and aged decades the last few years.
But for now, just keep an eye on whether he fires his chief of staff (Yermak), a key signal of how serious Zelensky really is about cleaning up Ukraine’s act while it fights for its survival.
Intrigue’s Take
To be clear, the fact Ukraine’s investigators — and its raucous free press — are absolutely going to town on elites is itself evidence of
a living, breathing (if coughing) democracy
worth defending. One need only glance over the border to recall the alternative.
Can anyone send us the link to Russia’s credible investigation after the Panama Papers
exposed
Putin’s billions? Or how
his best friend (Roldugin) earned billions
playing a cello? (dude must be awesome) Or why the guy who made
a two-hour documentary
on Putin’s $1.4
billion
Black Sea mega-palace ended up dead in a Putin prison?
The absence of scandal in an autocracy is often just a symptom of its silent, dehumanising condition. And inversely (if uncomfortably), the
presence
of scandal in a democracy often just reflects the
messy but sacred human agency
underneath. And that’s worth fighting for, everywhere, every time.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇹🇷
TURKEY
-
Next COP host.
After a drawn-out stalemate, Turkey and Australia have agreed Turkey will host next year’s COP climate talks while Australia will chair — as a consolation prize, Australia’s would-be co-hosts (Pacific Island nations) will also host a pre-COP summit. (
Climate Home News
)
Comment
: Everyone remembers a host, not a chair, so this is a win for Turkey over Australia. There’ll be a post-mortem, but Turkey might’ve benefited from developing the world’s third-largest diplomatic network (versus Australia’s ~2nd-smallest in the G20). That’s helped Turkey push its own credentials (and undermine Australia’s climate cred as an energy exporter). Australia’s government might’ve also been quietly relieved to step away from what’s still a wedge issue politically back home.
🇳🇬
NIGERIA
-
School girls abducted.
President Tinubu has pledged every resource to find ~24 schoolgirls abducted from their school in north-western Nigeria. There’ve been ~1,500 kids abducted since Boko Haram’s infamous 2014 kidnapping, though no group has claimed responsibility this time. (
AfricaNews
)
🇳🇱
NETHERLANDS
-
Here, have it back.
Dutch authorities have now halted their emergency takeover of local China-owned chipmaker Nexperia, after Beijing flexed its own leverage by halting Nexperia’s chip exports out of China (a key global automotive input). (
Guardian
)
Comment
: This all gels with reports the two sides are de-escalating, though our sense is the de-escalation is mostly in China’s favour — it turns out Nexperia’s Dutch subsidiary now relies much more on China than vice versa.
🇼🇸
SAMOA
-
Banned.
Samoan Prime Minister Laʻauli Leuatea Schmidt has suspended the country’s only daily newspaper from government press conferences, amid a feud over the Samoa Observer’s coverage of Laʻauli's New Zealand hospital stay. Critics argue the move is an attack on press freedoms. (
Guardian
)
🇦🇲
ARMENIA
-
Building
bridges
highways.
Prime Minister Pashinyan has announced work to construct the
Trump Route for International Peace and Prosperity
linking rival Azerbaijan to Baku’s Nakhchivan exclave (a ~Long Island-sized area surrounded by Armenia, Iran, and Turkey) will kick off next year. It continues to anger some locals in the way it’ll cut across Armenian territory. (
EurasiaNet
)
Comment
: We explored this one
here
.
🇵🇭
PHILIPPINES
-
Flood scandal.
Two cabinet ministers have resigned amid allegations they might’ve been involved in a scandal involving billions of missing funds destined for flood relief. (
Al Jazeera
)
🇲🇽
MEXICO
-
Warning signs.
US and Mexican diplomats are smoothing things over after Mexican marines removed a series of new signs purporting to designate a Rio Grande shoreline (near the SpaceX Starbase) restricted US turf. (
France24
)
Comment
: These issues crop up periodically because a chunk of the US-Mexico border is demarcated by a river, which naturally changes course over the years. There’s a binational agency purpose-built to help, though these issues will always generate more headlines when US-Mexico tensions run high (like right now).
Extra Intrigue
In other worlds…
Law enforcement:
Drugs disguised as tea bags
keep washing up on the beaches of South Korea’s Jeju Island.
Tech
: TikTok will now let users control
how much AI-generated content they see
on their feeds.
Sports
: UK football team
Arsenal will end its long-running partnership
with Rwanda’s government due to Kigali’s role in neighbouring DR Congo’s conflict.
Auction of the day
Credits: Christie’s.
If you’ve ever tried to attend a concert in the past five years, you’re probably well acquainted with the devastating feeling of having your tickets magically disappear from your cart because you didn’t check out fast enough.
Well something vaaaaaguely similar happened on Wednesday, when auction house Christie’s halted the sale of a rare ‘
Pascaline
’, history’s first calculator machine, invented by the legendary Blaise Pascal at age 19. Christie’s had to pull the rug after a French court ruled the artefact will likely receive French ‘national treasure’ status, banning its export.
Today’s poll
What do you think this US 28-point plan for Ukraine is?
🧍 A Witkoff original
🖋️ A high-ball to make Ukraine more flexible
👊 A fait accompli Trump will impose on Ukraine
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think this UN-backed plan for Gaza will work?
👍 Yes, it's now got the necessary backing (20%)
👎
No, it doesn't address the root causes (79%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (1%)
Your two cents:
👎
J.M.D:
“Nobody is going to disarm Hamas or contest its authority in the areas it controls. Realistic best-case scenario is Hamas functioning something like Hezbollah in Lebanon.”
👎
G.H:
“The plan doesn’t remotely take into account how extremism works and why groups like Hamas exist.”
✍️
R.R:
“Just don’t know, but hope for its success. The world needs a peaceful victory.”