URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/updates-finnish-pipeline-damage
Title: 🌍 Updates on the Finnish pipeline damage

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Need some inspiration to get out there and learn that foreign language? Here’s
footage
of 80-year-old rock legend Mick Jagger speaking French.
Today’s briefing is a 4 min read:
🇫🇮
Finland
looks at
China
in pipeline damage probe.
🇵🇰
Pakistan’s
exiled prime minister is back.
➕
Plus:
Where the rich stash their cash, how the papers are covering Israel and Hamas, and why folks in China are tweeting about California’s governor.
¿Hablas español?
¡Check out
our weekly edition in Spanish
!
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇯🇵
Japan
: Tokyo’s fair trade watchdog has
opened a probe
into Google after the tech giant allegedly pushed smartphone makers to use its search engine by default. India, the EU, and the US have all levelled similar accusations in recent years.
🇮🇸
Iceland
: The prime minister will join tens of thousands taking part in
Iceland’s women’s strike
today. The first such strike in 1975 brought the country to a standstill and led to several policy reforms.
🇵🇭
Philippines
: Manila has summoned China’s ambassador after two
vessels ‘bumped’ Philippine resupply ships
over the weekend. At the time of the incident, Manila was resupplying a WWII-era ship it grounded in 1999 to check China’s vast South China Sea claims.
🇭🇹
Haiti
: Haitian police have
arrested a key suspect
in the 2021 homicide of President Jovenel Moise. The former justice ministry official is accused of ordering the president’s assassination.
🇮🇷
Iran
: A state media outlet says Armita Geravand, a
teenager allegedly assaulted
by the morality police in December, now appears “
brain-dead
”. Her case has elicited parallels with the case of Mahsa Amini, whose death sparked major unrest last year.
🇫🇮
Finland | Intelligence & security
Credits: Samuli Huttunen / Yle.
Finland eyes Chinese ship in pipeline probe
Finnish authorities say they’re
investigating a Hong Kong-flagged vessel
in connection with this month’s suspected sabotage of a gas pipeline and data cable in the Gulf of Finland.
Here’s what happened.
On 8 October, authorities registered a leak in the 77km Balticconnector gas pipeline between Finland and Estonia. It now remains offline for months of repairs, leaving Finland to rely on LNG shipments instead.
Finnish authorities say
they believe the damage was caused by “
an external mechanical force
”, and they’re looking into two vessels that were in the pipeline’s vicinity that night:
🇨🇳
The NewNew Polar Bear
*, a Chinese cargo ship travelling between Russia and China, whose movements “​​
coincide with the time and place of the gas pipeline damage
”, and
🇷🇺
The Sevmorput
, one of Russia’s four nuclear-powered merchant ships, now operated by a Russian state-owned energy company.
For their part, both
China
and
Russia
deny any role.
And of course, there’s a less intriguing possibility: a rogue anchor might’ve caused this, accidentally or otherwise. It’d fit
reports
that an object (not a blast) was at fault, and that an “
extremely heavy object
” was found nearby.
Intrigue's take:
It’d be surprising for China to have played a deliberate role in an incident so far from its turf, particularly using a ship that the world was already watching so closely (the NewNew Polar Bear just
became the first
regular vessel to reach Kaliningrad via the Northern Sea Route).
Either way, this whole saga reminds us of five things:
First, undersea infrastructure is more critical today than ever
Second, it’s also more vulnerable than ever
Third, grey zone tactics are becoming more common (i.e., inflicting damage without crossing the threshold of armed conflict)
Fourth, this all makes attribution both high-stakes and hard, and
Fifth, this all in turn makes the democratic preference for transparent investigations one heck of a delicate balancing act.
Also worth noting:
Russia has
expressed dissatisfaction
numerous times at Finland’s recent NATO accession.
Natural gas accounts for around
8% of Finland’s energy needs
.
* The NewNew Polar Bear isn’t new (it was built in
2005
).
Sweden said yesterday (Monday) it’s treating the parallel damage to the
Estonia-Sweden
communications cable
as a related incident
.
📰
How newspapers covered…
Israel and Hamas
Noida, India
“Israel to release Hamas attack's raw, unedited bodycam footage amid 'Holocaust denial-like phenomenon'”
London, UK
“Israel hits Gaza with one of deadliest nights of bombings so far in war against Hamas”
Arlington, USA
“Hamas frees two Israeli women, U.S. works to delay ground war to allow more negotiations”
🇵🇰
Pakistan | Politics
A former leader shakes up Pakistan’s election
Former Pakistani Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif returned to the country over the weekend after a four-year self-imposed exile in the UK.
Sharif is no ordinary former prime minister:
He served for nine non-consecutive years (1990-93, 1997-99, and 2013-17), making him the longest serving leader in Pakistani history
But he was ousted before finishing each one of his three terms
He was then convicted of corruption and
disqualified
from office, but
He then had his disqualification
reduced to five years
after his brother Shehbaz became prime minister last year.
Lawyers say Sharif may still have legal hurdles to clear before he can run in Pakistan’s election in January, but his party has been clear: the aim is for him to become prime minister a fourth time.
Intrigue’s take:
Nothing in Pakistani politics gets done without the military’s permission, and the military is no great friend of Sharif’s (it removed him from office in 1999 and forced him into his first decade-long exile).
So why’d it let Sharif back into the country now?
Because the military has a bigger problem: the party led by strident critic (and former PM / cricket star) Imran Khan remains immensely popular, despite him
being in prison
.
The enemy you know…
Also worth noting:
According to a
snap survey
, 30% of Pakistanis believe Sharif can pull Pakistan out of its current crisis, versus 22% for Khan.
Critics have claimed Pakistan’s decision to
push its election back
from November to January was to accommodate Sharif’s return.
A Pakistani court said yesterday (Monday) that Imran Khan could face the
death penalty
over charges that he revealed state secrets.
🎧 Today on
Intrigue Outloud
Can NATO defend the Baltic Sea from saboteurs?
Find out here!
➕
Extra Intrigue
Here’s what folks have been tweeting about lately:
🇨🇭
“Chiesa”
was trending in
Switzerland
after the national-conservative Swiss People’s Party of Marco
Chiesa
won
federal elections
on Sunday.
🇨🇳
Folks in
China
tweeted about
“#Newsom”
after Californian governor Gavin Newsom
landed there
to talk climate change yesterday.
🇻🇪
And
Venezuelans
had a lot to say about
“María Corina Machado,”
who
won the opposition’s presidential primary
on Sunday.
🗳️ Poll time!
Which infrastructure do you think is most vulnerable?
📱 Tech hardware
💻 Tech software
⚡ Energy
🌉 Transport
🚰 Water & sanitation
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
📊
Chart of the day
Credits: EU Tax Observatory.
Where do rich folks stash their cash abroad?
According to a new
report
by the EU Tax Observatory, offshore centres in Asia such as Singapore and Hong Kong have soared in popularity since the early 2000s. In parallel, Switzerland has gone from hosting half of all global offshore wealth to about 20% today, as authorities have curtailed Swiss bank secrecy.
Yesterday’s poll:
Who would you have supported in Argentina's presidential election yesterday?
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️
📈
Sergio Massa, current economy minister (35%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
⚡ Javier Milei, populist libertarian (39%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️
👩‍💼
Patricia Bullrich, former security minister (26%)
Your two cents
:
📈
B.C:
“It's a real Sophie's choice, isn't it? Massa shares responsibility for Argentina's current state, but electing Milei is like cutting off the proverbial nose.”
⚡
T
: “Out with the old, in with something new.”
👩‍💼
J.M.F:
“Regardless of the victor, the economy will be due for a reckoning during or after the transition in December.”