URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/us-industrial-policy-making-americas-allies-angry
Title: US industrial policy is making America’s allies angry

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
COP 27 is well underway in Egypt's Sharm El-Sheik, where over 100 world leaders are still gathering to solve climate change. You don't need us to tell you it's an urgent issue -
take a look for yourself
at how our world is changing.
Today’s briefing is a ~4.6 min read:
🏭
US industrial policy
is angering America’s allies.
➕ Plus:
Nicaragua’s opposition comes up empty, Bolsonaro supporters stay on the streets, and TikTok's collection of user data.
📰 GLOBAL HEADLINES
Stories:
The Daily Post
,
Ad Dustour
,
Diario Financiero
,
Publico
,
IOL News
🤿 DEEP DIVE
The US is losing faith in free trade
In brief:
Consecutive US Presidents have now embraced a more protectionist approach to global trade policy.
European and Asian allies worry that US subsidies for manufacturers of semiconductor chips and cars will weaken their own domestic industries.
US policymakers are embracing interventionist industrial policy, perhaps at the expense of free trade with its allies.
Capitol control
There’s still plenty of vote counting to do (and some run-offs to run) before the outcome of the 2022 US midterm elections is clear.
Whichever party ultimately claims each chamber of Congress will do so with far slimmer margins than many analysts expected.
But no matter the result, the election will do little to shake the
emerging consensus among both parties
that the neoliberal economic order - free trade and free markets - is no longer serving US interests.
Why now?
Experts believe the popularity of free-trade sceptics Bernie Sanders and Donald Trump in the 2016 Presidential Election helped drive the bipartisan embrace of protectionism.
Donald Trump, who once described himself as the '
Tariff Man
' (arguably the world’s most boring superhero idea), used a wide range of import controls to reshape US trade policy.
For all their disagreements,
President Biden’s '
polite protectionism
' approach to trade has been much the same as his predecessor.
In fact, Biden’s current National Security Advisor, Jake Sullivan, had pushed for a reimagined trade policy in a
2020
Foreign Policy
op-ed
:
❝
“A better approach to trade, then, should [...] involve a laser focus on what
improves wages and creates high-paying jobs in the United States, rather than making the world safe for corporate investment. And it should connect foreign trade policy to domestic investments in workers and communities.”
Following through
Congress has taken the hint, passing several major pieces of legislation to strengthen American industries that policymakers consider vital to national security.
But the intervention has upset some US allies.
1. 🇪🇺 The EU
European leaders are particularly frustrated with the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA), a $370B climate bill that offers subsidies to consumers who purchase American-made electric vehicles.
By contrast,
French electric car buyers are eligible for a tax rebate
regardless of where the vehicle was manufactured.
French President
Emmanuel Macron threatened to retaliate
during a recent meeting with German Chancellor Olaf Scholz:
❝
“We need a ‘Buy European Act’ like the Americans, we need to reserve [state subsidies] for our European manufacturers [...] You have China that is protecting its industry, the US that is protecting its industry, and Europe that is an open house.”
2. 🇰🇷 South Korea
South Korean officials are contending with two challenges to local industry: the IRA, and the CHIPS and Science Act (which incentivises semiconductor chip manufacturers to move to the United States).
South Korea’s Samsung and SK Hynix currently control ~70% of global memory chip manufacturing, but are losing talent to foreign competitors.
In response, President Yoon Suk-yeol has
proposed an ambitious workforce training measure
and subsidies for chip manufacturers.
New world order?
The United States promoted free markets
as an engine of global growth in the decades after World War II.
Former US President Richard Nixon’s 1972 visit to Beijing promised to welcome China into the global economic community, and had been celebrated across the political spectrum.
But in an era of intense global economic competition, American policymakers are singing a different tune - and America’s allies and adversaries are starting to sing along.
🤝 SPONSORED BY CHARTR
Get smarter with the #1 visual newsletter
Ask any avid reader of newsletters, and they’ll tell you
Chartr
is one of the most unique out there
. Chartr’s free, visual email sent 3x/week is packed with beautiful charts, facts, and data snacks, delivering the latest insights on business, tech, entertainment and society.
Tackling topics like: “How Disney makes, and spends, its money”, “The rapid rise of TikTok”, "Why 'space junk' is a growing problem”, and much, much more.
There’s a good reason why over 1 million visual thinkers, including 300,000 newsletter readers, use Chartr’s snackable charts and easy-to-remember data insights to better understand their world.
Subscribe for free.
🔦 REGIONAL SPOTLIGHT
The Americas
🇧🇷 Brazil
Tens of thousands of Jair Bolsonaro supporters are
calling for military intervention
to keep the outgoing President in power.
Protesters gathered outside military bases around the country, complaining of fraud and calling for the military to oversee new elections.
While Bolsonaro has privately accepted his defeat and agreed to a peaceful transfer of power, he has done little to publicly assuage his most ardent supporters.
🇨🇦 Canada
Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau has accused China of
attempting to interfere in Canada’s
elections.
According to Canadian media outlet Global News, China funded a “clandestine network” of Beijing-approved candidates in the 2019 federal elections.
China has responded to the accusations by urging Canada to refrain from “making remarks that hurt China-Canada relations."
🇳🇮 Nicaragua
The ruling Sandinista National Liberation Front
won all of Nicaragua’s 153 municipalities
in last weekend’s election.
Don't be too impressed: President Daniel Ortega outlawed all major opposition parties ahead of the election.
Ortega’s suppression of opposition has kicked into high gear since anti-government protests hit the country in 2018.
🇵🇪 Peru
The embattled Castillo Administration has dared opposition forces in Peru’s Congress to call
a confidence vote against... itself?
!
President Castillo is going big to avoid going home: if Congress calls the vote and he loses, his entire cabinet will have to resign.
However, if Congress fails to pass a no-confidence vote
twice
, Castillo will be granted the power to shut Congress down and call for fresh legislative elections.
🌎 Regional
Barbados’ Prime Minister Mia Amor Mottley announced the creation of a
South-South agreement to boost the pharmaceutical
sectors in Latin America, the Caribbean, and Africa.
The goal is to develop and manufacture 60% of all essential pharmaceuticals used in the three regions
within
the three regions by 2040.
WHO Director-General Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus welcomed the initiative, saying
“manufacturing capacity for medicines, diagnostics vaccines and other tools is concentrated in too few countries.”
🗞 IN OTHER NEWS...
TikTok boom
The news:
TikTok employees in several of the company’s offices around the world will be able to
access European users’ private data
beginning on 2 December.
According to Elaine Fox, the company’s head of privacy in Europe, the data reviews will help ensure high-quality platform performance.
The intrigue:
TikTok’s parent company, ByteDance, has been accused of harbouring close ties to the Chinese government, leading critics to wonder how users' data is being used.
Company executives admit that employees in China can access a
"
narrow set of non-sensitive
"
data, but deny reports that it
uses the platform to push propaganda
.
But policymakers in Europe and the US aren’t convinced.
In August, the official UK Parliament TikTok account (sounds like a real thriller)
shut down following pressure
from security-minded MPs.
And just last week, a commissioner on the US Federal Communications Commission
called for TikTok to be banned
(again) in the US.
What’s next:
Momentum is building, especially among conservatives in the US, to ban the platform.
Kevin Roose, host of the New York Times tech podcast “Hard Fork," told
The Atlantic’s Derek Thompson
:
❝
“[Lawmakers] are really just looking for one smoking gun, one point of proof that the Chinese government is using TikTok to either push propaganda or influence elections or influence the minds of America’s teens.”
Have they found what they’re looking for?
🤔 WE'RE INTRIGUED BY...
Hiring YOU to help us grow!
via Giphy
We're expanding, and we want you on our team.
Get the chance to join our fast-growing start-up and make your mark while working in a collaborative, supportive environment. Our new growth associate will...
✅ develop, manage, and report on paid social media ads (Twitter, LinkedIn, Facebook)
✅ brainstorm and assist in updating advertising copy
✅ communicate with larger team results and initiatives as well as what you need from them to make successful (managing up)
✅ read and understand the newsletter and think of ways to distribute it across socials
Our new addition will be working directly with Intrigue's Growth and Ops guru
Aine Stapleton
. To learn more about the position, see the
full posting here
.