URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/us-spies-grilled-in-congress
Title: 🌍 US spies grilled in Congress

Today’s briefing:
— Congress grills the spies
— A $40 smartphone in Africa?
— A new soccer record is born
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. There’s an
optimisation culture
gaining ground these days — track that sleep, measure that VO2, down that supplement, catch that podcast, boost that productivity, and tweak that portfolio, all while chiselling those abs.
There’s nothing inherently wrong with any single activity or even combination — who doesn’t like wealthy abs. But to the extent this broader culture implies life’s value or purpose is out there via some extrinsic, measurable output, we risk missing the good stuff.
Take reading. I’ve occasionally felt fiction is a missed opportunity to crunch through a Mao biography at 3x listening speed while running laps at 10pm or whatever, but another classic spy thriller just disabused me of that notion again. It was
Damascus Station,
the debut 2021 novel by former CIA officer, David McCloskey, who just scored a movie deal.
My main takeaway? Set in the dying days of Syria’s Assad regime (and eerily prescient about his demise btw), it all reminded me — in a way headlines can’t always do — of the real people and lives now caught up in our world’s historic events.
Anyway, McCloskey’s former
spy bosses
have just endured their
annual grilling by Congress
, so let’s take a look at what they’ve revealed, shall we?
PS —
¿Hablas español?
¡Check out
our weekly edition in Spanish
!
Intrigue Insight: Iran war, day 21
In the energy markets:
European
gas prices are up another 30%
after an Iranian missile hit the world’s
largest LNG export hub
in Qatar. Details are still emerging, but that’s a $60B facility, built over 25+ years, supplying ~20% of the world’s LNG… now at risk. LNG prices are still, however, at barely a fifth of their 2022 crisis levels.
The Iranians say it was all
retaliation
for earlier Israeli hits on the world’s biggest gasfield in Iran, though the regime has hit energy targets since day one. Either way, President Trump has voiced anger at his Israeli allies for the lack of a heads-up, while threatening to blow up Iran’s field himself if Iran hits Qatar again.
Comment
: Trump’s intervention is an attempt to manage escalation and normalise energy markets, though with energy infrastructure now ablaze in Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and the UAE, that ship might’ve sailed (if it weren’t stranded in Hormuz).
On the battlefield:
Iran has confirmed Israel
took out its intelligence minister (Khatib)
, marking the third top regime death in as many days (after Larijani and the Basij chief).
Meanwhile, the Israelis have now
hit Iranian navy targets in the Caspian Sea
, widening Israel’s initial focus beyond eastern, southern, and central Iran.
Comment
:
With Khatib et al, the Israelis are hoping to blind the regime to domestic threats and decapitate it into submission. As for those Caspian hits? They’ll partly sever a key Iran-Russia weapons supply corridor.
Other:
While Australia’s central bank just raised, its Japanese and US counterparts have kept their
interest rates unchanged
, citing wartime instability and uncertainty.
And speaking of
the Aussies
, Prime Minister Albanese has urged folks to be sensible when buying fuel, blaming localised shortages on hoarding rather than any actual disruption in supply (though the risks will rise).
And Brazil’s farm minister has warned the world’s second-largest agricultural exporter (by value)
faces a fertiliser crunch
if this war doesn’t end soon.
The threats among us.
From L to R: DNI Gabbard, CIA chief Ratcliffe, NSA lead Hartman, FBI boss Patel
DC's intelligence chiefs have stepped out of the shadows and into the congressional spotlight for their annual grilling this week.
Sure, it’s all tied to the unclassified
Annual Threat Assessment
, and spooks love to defer spicy answers to the off-camera closed-door briefings, but it’s still pretty revealing.
So here are the week’s top five spymaster lines you need to know, starting with…
"Diplomatically, they were saying one thing; the intelligence was reflecting quite the contrary"
– The CIA’s John Ratcliffe
As this Iran war drags on and the costs mount, the spotlight inevitably shifts to
Trump’s justification
. And you’ll recall barely days before an Israeli airstrike hit Ali Larijani, the key regime official was still shuttling between Muscat and Doha for last-ditched US talks. In fact, by the time the last Geneva round wrapped late February, reporters on both sides were sounding hopeful as the agenda shifted to technical details — generally a good sign.
But then Trump pulled the trigger.
Why?
According to Ratcliffe, CIA analysts concluded the Iranians had no genuine intent to abandon their nuclear ambitions, implying the talks were just a ruse to buy time and extract concessions.
Ratcliffe therefore reiterated that Iran "
posed an immediate threat at this time.
" But…
“As a result of Operation Midnight Hammer, Iran’s nuclear enrichment program was obliterated. There has been no efforts since then to try to rebuild their enrichment capability”
– Trump’s spymaster, Tulsi Gabbard
To no one’s surprise, senators then narrowed in on Gabbard’s line above: if last year’s strikes had been so decisive, how could Trump then argue the threat was so
“imminent”?
Rather than contradict the boss, Gabbard engaged in a bit of
Macduffian logic
to argue it’s
"not the intelligence community's responsibility to determine what is and is not an imminent threat”
. Ie, while spooks clearly assess threats, only the president then has the authority to unilaterally declare
“imminent threat
” status to justify executive action.
Gabbard was then careful to pivot back to
current successes
, arguing
"the regime in Iran appears to be intact but largely degraded by Operation Epic Fury. Its regional power projection capabilities have been destroyed, leaving limited options."
“Are you saying there is no foreign threat to our elections in the midterms this year?
– Mark Warner, Senate Intelligence Committee
Sometimes there’s plenty revealed in what an intel report
doesn’t
say: for the first time since 2017, DC’s threat assessment makes zero mention of any foreign election interference, even though the high-stakes midterms are just months away.
Why?
As your favourite non-partisan team of ex-diplomats, we’ll let you select from the available options, including…
a
) after nine years of consistent annual threat assessments, Putin and others suddenly stopped their
meddling
or figured out how to avoid detection
b
) per the senator’s suggestion, it all hints at the politicisation or suppression of intelligence under current leadership, and/or
c
) per Gabbard’s claim, this administration is just fixing
past
politicisation…
"The IC assesses that China likely prefers to set the conditions for an eventual peaceful reunification with Taiwan short of conflict"
–
Gabbard
In a sense, that’s obvious — if you think you can get something for free, why risk a war. But in the context of past assessments, this line still dials down some of the imminence.
And it’s worth recalling some of that imminence stems from famous Georgetown remarks by the CIA’s then-chief,
Bill Burns
, who warned that,
“as a matter of intelligence, we know that [Xi] has instructed the People’s Liberation Army to be ready by 2027 to conduct a successful invasion of Taiwan”
. To be clear, Burns emphasised it was to be
ready
, not
do it
.
But it wasn’t just Bill. That 2027 date was already featuring in annual threat assessments because Xi Jinping himself put it there via a big deadline for his
military’s
modernisation
. Why 2027? It’s the People’s Liberation Army’s 100th anniversary.
Still, while Gabbard’s cautious tone might reflect Trump 2.0’s current stabilisation phase on China, the actual report still has spicy lines like this: “
China aims to dominate its region and challenge Washington’s leadership
”.
"Africa has increasingly become a focal point for the global Sunni jihadist movement."
—
Annual Threat Assessment 2026
You know we try to brief you beyond the headlines, and it’s not just us
warning
about the rapid spread of jihadis across Africa’s west while the world focuses elsewhere.
In fact, the report warns that both Al Qaeda and ISIS have recorded their most growth over the past five years by exploiting grievances around local conflicts in Africa.
Anyway, there you have it, dear Intriguer. Sometimes the real intelligence is not just what the spooks say, but what they
carefully
say, or don’t say at all.
Intrigue’s Take
One big lesson worth drawing from all the above is
how quickly assessments can change
. You only have to go back to the
2024 report
to glimpse fresh references to Netanyahu being on the ropes politically, while Iran was “
not currently undertaking the key nuclear weapons-development activities necessary to produce a testable nuclear device"
.
Another is that you
don’t need top secret clearance
and a seat in congress to know some answers. Eg, the spymasters confirmed that Tehran has sought help from Beijing and Moscow, but they left any Russian/Chinese response to the closed-door briefing.
Yet it’s likely Putin is helping target not just US assets, but energy assets across the Middle East. Why? Higher prices help lift his revenue and (if the West gets desperate enough) lower his sanctions, both of which are necessary to keep his wartime economy afloat.
It’s worth also keeping in mind that, while higher prices clearly help Putin’s war effort, his ultra-costly war effort has also massively shifted the goalposts he must now reach to still survive: his break-even price point for oil is now almost double what it was pre-war.
The thing is, however, with Putin’s other key exports like gas and fertiliser now also firing thanks to Iran, his fiscal situation will look a little less hopeless each month this new war lasts.
Sound even smarter:
The annual report also includes one of the bluntest-ever US intel assessments that Pakistan’s ICBM program is on track to go intercontinental (ie, reach the US).
The DIA chief (Lt. Gen. Adams) is due to appear today (Thursday) — you can expect lawmakers to grill him on reports his agency provided the outdated intel that contributed to a deadly US airstrike on the girls’ school in southern Iran.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇻🇪
VENEZUELA
-
Concentrate.
Delcy Rodríguez has ousted long-time defence chief Vladimir Padrino, marking the biggest leadership shakeup since Maduro’s capture in January. (
IntelliNews
)
Comment
:
Padrino was Maduro’s longest-serving defence minister (2014-2026), so removing him now says two things:
a
) Rodriguez wants to reduce coup risks from Maduro’s hardline holdovers, and
b
) she’s now feeling confident enough to make that move without risking an immediate backlash.
🇵🇰
PAKISTAN
-
Ramadan pause.
Afghanistan and Pakistan have agreed to a five-day pause for Eid al-Fitr (the end of Ramadan). (
Al Jazeera
)
Comment:
It’s impeccable timing to let temperatures cool, after shock reports that a Pakistani strike on Kabul killed hundreds earlier this week.
🇪🇺
EUROPEAN UNION
-
At long last?
Adding to its recent string of trade deals with Mercosur and India, the EU now looks set to finalise its long-awaited pact with Australia next week. (
Politico
)
Comment
:
The give-away is von der Leyen’s announcement she’ll be heading Down Under from March 23-25 — it’s a long way to travel empty-handed. Anyway, nothing like the fear of a less-secure, less-interconnected world to get that trade bureaucracy going, and force industry groups to re-think how red those red lines are.
🇸🇬
SINGAPORE
-
Relationship status.
Japan and Singapore have agreed to upgrade their ties to a strategic partnership as they mark their 60th anniversary of diplomatic relations. The upgrade promises deeper cooperation across hot topics like AI, trade, defence, and energy. (
Straits Times
)
Comment
:
The defence angle is notable for non-aligned Singapore, and reflects Japan’s quiet success building ties across a Southeast Asia still wary of a rising China.
🇨🇺
CUBA
-
Russian oil.
Two tankers full of Russian energy appear to be headed towards Cuba, days after the island suffered one of its most extensive power outages. (
Maritime Exchange
)
Comment
:
President Trump has previously threatened to impose sanctions on anyone sending Cuba oil, but with his attention elsewhere (Iran) and Russia’s newfound popularity (oil), Putin probably feels confident enough to call Trump’s bluff.
🇳🇬
NIGERIA
-
Attack thwarted.
The Nigerian army says it’s repelled an attack by armed insurgents on a base in northeastern Nigeria, killing 80 assailants. It comes after a series of coordinated suicide bombings in the area on Monday, which left 23 dead. (
Reuters
)
Extra Intrigue
Meanwhile, in other worlds…
Tech
: A telco lobby group is
launching a $40 smartphone
across several African countries.
Business
: Australian mining giant BHP has welcomed its
new CEO Brandon Craig
, known not only for his two first names, but his bullish vibes on copper.
Art
: This year’s Venice Biennale looks as polarised as ever, with the
EU threatening to cut funds
if the organisers go ahead with plans to approve a Russian pavilion, while over 200 artists want Israel barred.
From our friends
Not just another TL;DR news digest.
The Pint is the
world’s only meme-based email newsletter
, bringing you global news through memes.
After failing (spectacularly) to convince traditional media outlets to open a meme desk, they went rogue and created The Pint. They trudge through global news to deliver a weekly digest of the week’s most memeable moments.
Every Friday. For Free.
Record of the day
Credits: @iapa_cdmx via Twitter/X
Thousands again filled Mexico City’s vast
zocalo
square on Sunday, but not to protest!
Rather, 9,500 locals joined a mass soccer training session, breaking last year’s world record set in Seattle with a paltry 1,000 participants.
Projecting a more family-friendly image after last month’s cartel violence, it’s part of Mexico’s run-up to June’s FIFA World Cup, which it’ll co-host with the US and Canada.
Today’s poll
Which world leader do you think will emerge most strengthened by this Iran war?
🇺🇸 Donald Trump
🇷🇺 Vladimir Putin
🇮🇱 Bibi Netanyahu
🇪🇸 Pedro Sanchez
🇮🇷 Khamenei Jr
🇨🇳 Xi Jinping
✍️ Other (write us!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Who do you think is 'winning' the battle for LatAm influence?
🇨🇳
China (tell us why!) (81%)
🇺🇸
The US (tell us why!) (18%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (1%)
Your two cents:
🇨🇳
L.D
: “Because China paid attention to South America and the US has pretty much ignored it.”
🇨🇳
S.V.C:
“US foreign relations shifts on a daily basis. Countries need stability which China will provide (at a cost).”
🇺🇸
J.L.Q:
“Geographical proximity still is a huge factor, plus debt to US banks, in addition to the money sent to LatAm from expatriates in the US.”
✍️
H.L:
“Right now it’s probably a tie, but I spend time in Central America every year and for the most part, the people seem more pro-US.”