URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/us-takes-harder-stance-against-maduro
Title: 🌍 US takes harder stance against Maduro

IN TODAY’S EDITION
1️⃣ US backs Venezuelan opposition leader
2️⃣ Diplomats on the move
3️⃣ Today in history
Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
One of the things I miss most about the foreign service is getting to visit colleagues posted to exotic corners of the world. Be it Mumbai, Brussels, Jakarta, or even Honolulu (yes, some are lucky enough to score this gig).
But some postings are more exciting than others, and are often located in countries less accessible to the average globetrotter, like Iran or Cuba. The diplomats who’ve served in those postings tend to have the most colourful stories.
One of my former colleagues is currently serving in such a posting, getting to see the latest political developments on the ground in Venezuela. I’d give anything to be able to have a drink with them right now and hear what’s going on there. In lieu of that, we’ll dive into
Venezuela for our top story
today.
P.S:
Have you completed our
audience survey
yet? Two participants will be drawn at random to win either a
$50 Amazon gift card
or a bundle of
Intrigue merch
.
P.P.S.
- Welcome to our newest Intriguers who’ve just joined us from
The Ruck
! We recently acquired the national security newsletter, and we’re chuffed to have you onboard.
THE HEADLINES
India’s second-richest man charged by US.
Billionaire Gautam Adani and seven others have been
charged with fraud by US prosecutors
. They are accused of paying millions in bribes to Indian officials in exchange for contracts for their renewable energy business, and concealing it from US investors. Shares of Adani Group fell over 10% on Thursday morning.
Ukraine launches British-French Storm Shadow missiles into Russia.
For the first time, Ukraine
launched British-French made Storm Shadow
cruise missiles into Russia on Wednesday, according to reports - one day after using US-made long-range missiles. While Kyiv’s Defence Minister refused to confirm or deny the reports, Moscow had previously warned that using Western-made weapons deep into Russian territory would mark a major escalation. Meanwhile, Russia launched an
intercontinental ballistic missile
into Ukraine for the first time on Thursday, just after Putin changed the country’s nuclear doctrine.
Nvidia stocks slump as investors expect more.
The chipmaker’s revenue hit $35.1B in Q3, nearly doubling its results from the same period last year. Despite this, Nvidia shares fell after the company predicted its
revenue growth would slow
, disappointing investors’ sky-high expectations. Nvidia stocks have almost quadrupled since January, making it the most valuable company in the world.
Trump names his NATO ambassador.
The president-elect has chosen former acting Attorney General
Matt Whitaker to serve as US ambassador to NATO
, a military alliance Trump has been critical of in the past. In his announcement, Trump said Whitaker would “
strengthen relationships with our NATO Allies, and stand firm in the face of threats to Peace and Stability.
”
US vetos Gaza ceasefire resolution.
Fourteen of the Security Council’s 15 members voted in favour of a draft resolution which called for an
immediate ceasefire and the return of all hostages
. The US said the draft lacked “
a linkage between a ceasefire and the release of hostages
” and would send a dangerous message to Hamas. This is the fourth time the US has vetoed a ceasefire resolution at the UNSC.
TOGETHER WITH MODE MOBILE
Could this be the biggest disruption to Smartphones in the past 15 years?
📲
💥
Heads up! There's a new disruptor in smartphones: Mode Mobile. Mode can turn your phone from a cost into an income source — and investors are watching the launch of the company’s pre-IPO offering.
1
🤳
Mode saw 32,481% revenue growth from 2019 to 2022, ranking them the #1 overall software company on Deloitte’s most recent fastest-growing companies list. Mode’s flagship product EarnPhone, a budget smartphone, has already helped consumers earn & save $325M+.
🫴
Mode’s Pre-IPO offering
1
is live at $0.25/share — 20,000+ shareholders already participated in its previous sold-out offering. There’s still time to get in on Mode’s pre-IPO raise and even lock in 100% bonus shares
2
… but only until their current raise closes for good.
Claim this exclusive bonus while you can!
3
TOP STORY
US recognises Venezuelan ‘president-elect’ four months after election
President Nicolás Maduro (L) and opposition candidate Edmundo González Urrutia (R).
The Trump administration may not take office until 20 January, but Secretary of State Antony Blinken channelled the former and future president when
he changed US foreign policy by tweet
on Tuesday. Blinken recognised exiled opposition candidate Edmundo González Urrutia as Venezuela's "
president-elect
” in an unexpected move that could lock in US policy for years to come.
First, how did we get here?
In July, Venezuela held presidential elections that observers from
the Carter Center said
“did not meet international standards of electoral integrity and cannot be considered democratic.”
Nevertheless, President Nicolás Maduro claimed victory, despite:
Refusing to release official tally results (he still hasn’t released them)
Exit polls
conducted on election day pointed to an opposition win
Election tallies collected by the opposition from 83% of voting districts suggested
a comfortable win for González
.
But those are mere inconveniences when an incumbent with
an excellent track record of stealing elections
decides he’d like to stay in power a little longer. Maduro’s declaration of victory was followed by widespread protests in Venezuela, prompting a harsh but predictable crackdown from the government.
Fearing retribution from the regime,
government critics and members of the opposition fled Venezuela, including González who is currently exiled in Spain
. Exhortations from an increasingly long list of Western and Latin American governments to release the official results have had no effect on Nicolás Maduro, who's accused everybody and their dog of
plotting a coup against him
.
For keen Intriguers, this should ring a bell
The US, UK, and EU refused to acknowledge Maduro’s election win in 2018, instead recognising Juan Guaidó as the rightful Venezuelan president. At one point,
Guaidó was recognized as Venezuela's "interim" president by ~60 countries
while Maduro was only recognised by about 20.
But Guaidó's claim to the presidency never really went anywhere, and in 2021 the EU went back on its decision. One year later, the major opposition groups decided to dissolve the interim government.
So, why is the Biden administration doing this again, and why now?
The simple answer is we don’t know. We’ve got one idea, but it’s a guess so we’ll save it for the Intrigue’s Take below.
On one hand, Trump might be happy with this shift in policy
— his first administration adopted a 'maximum pressure' approach against Maduro, and his hand-picked Secretary of State nominee Marco Rubio has built his foreign policy career around hardline criticism of leftist regimes in Latin America. There's nothing to suggest Trump would go soft on Venezuela.
But on the other,
Maduro is unlikely to take this news well and could decide to make life difficult for the incoming US president. For a president elected on one of the most isolationist foreign policy platforms in the modern era, it will be interesting to see whether Trump prioritises punishing Maduro or pursuing his domestic priorities.
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
There’s speculation among folks we’ve talked to that Trump wanted to cut a deal with Maduro to achieve his immigration policy goals. We’ve written before that Donald
Trump will need to work with Latin American countries if he’s to fulfil his promise to deport millions of undocumented immigrants
and the only country in the region the US has major leverage over right now is Venezuela (okay, maybe Cuba as well).
Again, it’s only speculation but it’s reasonable to think Maduro would at least consider a deal to accept a large number of deported immigrants from the US in exchange for a thawing of US-Venezuela relations.
So back to the original question — conventional wisdom would suggest that this policy shift makes it harder for Trump to work with Maduro, and the reason the Biden administration announced this
now
is to make sure years of isolation and pressure aren’t undone on 20 January.
But we all know Trump has no time for conventional wisdom and if he wants to strike a deal with Maduro, a tweet from a lame-duck Secretary of State isn’t going to stop him.
Also worth noting:
When asked about the timing of the development, State Department spokesperson Matthew Miller
responded
: “
It has nothing to do with us being at the end of the administration
”, rather the Biden White House was waiting to see “
if the international pressure [...] would lead to a change in posture from his [Maduro’s] part
”.
Demand for the US dollar has spiked
since the July elections, as citizens fear a complete devaluation of the bolivar that could lead to out-of-control inflation.
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇹🇲
Turkmenistan
: Authorities
are cracking down on border crossings
with Uzbekistan after many citizens travelled to the neighbouring country to buy food and basic goods unavailable in local stores. Ashgabat is reportedly
“ashamed”
that citizens have to travel outside the country to procure necessities due to the country’s economic crisis.
🏴󠁧󠁢󠁳󠁣󠁴󠁿
Scotland
: US President-elect Donald Trump will
visit Scotland in the summer of 2025
for the opening of the Trump International golf course in Aberdeenshire, according to his son. The golf course is a controversial topic in Scotland after the site lost special protected environment status due to building changes, a process Eric Trump lamented saying that doing business in the country was
“virtually impossible.”
🇲🇾
Malaysia
: Malaysia’s Transport Minister Anthony Loke is
seeking Chinese support to
develop a high-speed rail network
between Beijing and Southeast Asia
to circumvent tensions in the South China Sea. Presently, rail networks connect Malaysia and China via Laos and Thailand but are slow and cannot meet capacity demand, according to Loke.
🇬🇾
Guyana
: Georgetown hosted Indian Prime Minister Modi in Guyana for the India-Caricom summit, a 15-member Caribbean trade bloc, yesterday (Wednesday). Guyana has
started fielding requests from prominent delegations
after vast quantities of oil and gas were discovered off the country’s coast, and operations commenced.
🇲🇦
Morocco
: Rabat approved a proposed 2025 budget
that would allow defence companies to bypass taxes
and increase the military budget to $13.32B next year. The move is seen as a way to boost production and incentivize foreign and domestic companies to invest in the country.
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Diplomats on the move ✈️
In the Middle East,
Qatar's Foreign Minister Al Thani
travelled to Tehran
to meet with his counterpart, Abbas Araghchi.
In Asia,
the Prime Minister of Samoa Fiame Naomi Mata’afa
is off to Beijing
at the invitation of China’s 2iC Premier Li Qiang.
In LATAM,
Iran's Defence Minister General Aziz Nasirzadeh is
attending the 10th Iran-Venezuela Joint Economic Committee
meeting in Caracas.
In Europe,
the British, Swedish, Finnish, Lithuanian, Estonian, and Dutch
defence chiefs
trekked to the German capital
for the Berlin Security Conference.
TODAY IN HISTORY
Credits: Eric Miller/Reuters
On this day in 1995, Dayton, Ohio became world famous for peace talks as it hosted a deal that reshaped the Balkans. Forcefully negotiated by US diplomat Richard "The Bulldozer" Holbrooke, the Dayton Accords ended the Bosnian War after nearly four years of bloodshed.
Negotiated at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, the deal brought together Bosnia, Croatia, and Serbia's leaders and created a complex power-sharing system, splitting Bosnia into two entities: the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Republika Srpska.
DAILY POLL
Which of the following cultural exports is the most powerful?
🎤 Music
🎥 Movies
📕 Literature
🎭 Theatre
🎨 Art
👚 Fashion
✍️ Other (Write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
What skill do you think world leaders attending international summits should brush up on?
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 🗣️ Communication (12%)
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🪢
Negotiation  (20%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🤔
Problem solving  (55%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
💬
Languages  (1%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
💥
Charisma (2%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
👀
Observation (5%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (Write in!)  (3%)
Your two cents:
🤔
R.L:
“Leaders coming to the conference with disagreements but no desire to compromise and solve them are just wasting everyone's time (or hoping to win political points).”
💥
M.A:
“Diplomats can deal with the specifics, but if heads of state are aligned and willing to tackle an issue it can be a game changer, and nothing like charisma to get other people on board or at least listening.”
🪢
C.D:
“The Art of the Deal... coming to a summit near you!”
💬
C.C:
“After all, we tend to treat each other better when we speak one another's language.”
✍️
J.S.G:
“Empathy and humanity.”
Was this forwarded to you? We're a team of ex-diplomats producing a concise and engaging geopolitical briefing for 100k+ leaders each day.
It’s free to subscribe
.
1
Mode Mobile recently received their ticker reservation with Nasdaq ($MODE), indicating an intent to IPO in the next 24 months. An intent to IPO is no guarantee that an actual IPO will occur.
2
A minimum investment of $1,950 is required to receive bonus shares. 100% bonus shares are offered on investments of $9,950+.
3
Please read the offering circular and
related risks
at
invest.modemobile.com
. This is a paid advertisement for Mode Mobile’s Regulation A+ Offering.
Past performance is no guarantee of future results. Start-up investments are speculative and involve a high degree of risk. Those investors who cannot afford to lose their entire investment should not invest in start-ups. Companies seeking startup investment tend to be in earlier stages of development and their business model, products and services may not yet be fully developed, operational or tested in the public marketplace. There is no guarantee that the stated valuation and other terms are accurate or in agreement with the market or industry valuations. Further, investors may receive illiquid and/or restricted stock that may be subject to holding period requirements and/or liquidity concerns.
DealMaker Securities LLC, a registered broker-dealer, and member of FINRA | SIPC, located at 105 Maxess Road, Suite 124, Melville, NY 11747, is the Intermediary for this offering and is not an affiliate of or connected with the Issuer. Please check our background on FINRA's BrokerCheck.