URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/wednesday-d654
Title: 🌍 US-Ukraine talks produce ceasefire proposal

IN TODAY’S EDITION
1️⃣ US-Ukraine peace talks
2️⃣ Leaders on the move
3️⃣ Toy of the day
Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
The headline ‘
US-Ukraine-Saudi ceasefire talks
’ was not on my bingo cards for 2025. But then again, it joins a long list of other wild things I did not have on my bingo cards for this year.
If you’re wondering, others included recent Intrigue headlines like the arrest of ex-Philippines president Duterte, China’s open source AI ‘DeepSeek’ challenging US giants, and Greenland bursting onto the global geopolitical stage.
But that’s why Intrigue is here — to help steer us through these global twists and turns. So let’s dive into today’s top story on these
latest Ukraine ceasefire talks
.
PS —
¿Hablas español?
¡Check out our
weekly edition in Spanish
!
THE HEADLINES
Trump’s 25% global tariffs on aluminium and steel kick in.
The EU has responded with levies on $28B worth of US goods, while Trump has announced then walked back additional tariffs on Canada, whose
frustration has been on full display
at a major energy conference in Houston this week (attended by Intrigue).
Israel and Lebanon start border talks.
Monday’s preliminary talks alongside US and French negotiators were an attempt to
stabilise the Israel-Lebanon border area
as the shaky Israel-Hezbollah ceasefire holds.
Opposition wins Greenland election.
In a shock result, the centre-right opposition
Demokraatit Party has won the most votes
in Greenland’s parliamentary elections, amid heightened international curiosity spurred by Trump’s comments about the US taking Greenland. Four of the five main parties variously support independence from Denmark, but Demokraatit wants a more gradual, long-term pathway — it’ll now lead coalition talks to form a government.
Romania court confirms Georgescu ban.
As we
foreshadowed
yesterday, Romania’s constitutional court has now confirmed the
banning of populist-right candidate Călin Georgescu
from May’s rescheduled presidential elections, amid allegations of Russian meddling.
China’s ‘Two Sessions’ wrap amid leader speculation.
China’s rubber-stamp legislature has approved the latest ‘
government work report
’, repeating Beijing’s ambitious 5% growth target and boosting military spending to $245B. But all that was soon overshadowed by the unusual
absence of the top legislative body’s chair himself
— official sources say Zhao Leji was suffering from a respiratory infection, though rumours of political intrigue will swirl until his next public appearance.
Duterte extradited to The Hague.
Former Philippine leader Rodrigo Duterte is
now in The Hague
to face International Criminal Court allegations of crimes against humanity during his war on drugs. His daughter, now the country’s VP and a rival of the sitting president who authorised the extradition, is travelling to the Netherlands to assist.
TOGETHER WITH MASTERWORKS
Access an asset class backed by +85% of HNW investors
A new UBS survey revealed something remarkable. As volatility and inflation may continue to hover, over 85% of High Net Worth investors remain confident in one asset class: art. A 2024 UBS report found HNWIs view art as a safer investment than stocks. An equal share agreed art diversifies portfolios, with 90% believing it experienced neutral/positive effects during inflation, high interest rates, and volatility.
The wealthiest of these ultra-wealthy respondents (UHNWIs) are allocating up to 25% of portfolios to art in 2024, and everyday investors are joining them through Masterworks. This art investing platform has returned $60+ million to investors across 23 exits, with net returns including +17.6%, +17.8%, +21.5%, and more (assets held 1+ year).
Sign up for free here.
TOP STORY
US-Ukraine talks produce ceasefire proposal
What are they feeding these lads in Ukraine? (L-R): America’s Mike Waltz and Marco Rubio, then Ukraine’s Andriy Yermak, Andrii Sybiha, and Rustem Umerov.
US and Ukrainian officials have just wrapped their peace talks in sunny Saudi Arabia, and we’re sure you’ve got questions, so let's get into it.
First, to clarify
, these peace talks were about peace
between Ukraine and its Russian occupiers
, though you’d be forgiven (and arguably a little right) for assuming this was also about patching things up between Kyiv and DC after
that
meeting in the Oval Office.
Who was there?
Marco Rubio led the US delegation, alongside national security advisor Mike Waltz. And on the other side of the white flower composition sat Ukraine’s Andriy Yermak (chief of staff), Andrii Sybiha (foreign minister), and Rustem Umerov (defence minister).
What were the pre-talk vibes?
Things were looking rosy in the lead-up:
President Zelensky floated the idea of a pause on aerial and naval attacks
Yermak (his chief of staff)
reiterated
Ukraine’s thanks for US support, and
Rubio
told
journalists he was feeling optimistic,
though reiterated his expectation that ultimately Ukraine would struggle to regain its full pre-invasion turf.
But what did the talks achieve?
Quite a bit. According to a
joint statement
just released, the two sides agreed:
To back a US proposal for an
i
mmediate 30-day ceasefire
with Russia
To
restore US intelligence sharing and security assistance
To negotiate “
an enduring peace that provides for
Ukraine’s long-term security
” (reflecting persistent fears that Putin will simply re-arm then re-attack)
To finally sign their
critical
minerals deal
(billed as a way to “
guarantee Ukraine’s long-term prosperity and security
” rather than to repay the US), and
They highlighted the importance of
Russia returning
“
forcibly transferred Ukrainian children
” (for which Putin is still under an international arrest warrant).
Meanwhile, Donald Trump has suggested President Zelensky is now once again welcome back at the White House, signalling a thawing since (yes)
that
meeting.
What’s next?
As Ukraine’s Volodymyr Zelensky puts it, “
if Russia agrees, the ceasefire will take effect immediately.
” So the ball’s now in Putin’s court.
So far, that’s looked like another barrage of Russian missile strikes overnight, plus criticism of the ceasefire from Putin’s rubber-stamp parliament (alleging it’ll be Ukraine, not Russia, who uses any pause to re-arm).
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
Zelensky has always been wary of proposed ceasefires unless they come with
a)
security guarantees, and
b)
credible monitoring — that’s to avoid another situation in which any ceasefire simply offers Putin a breather to freely rotate and reinforce assets then go harder once the ceasefire expires (or once he accuses Ukraine of a breach).
It’s unclear whether this proposed ceasefire satisfies either of those criteria, though a resumption in US intelligence sharing at least hints at how the monitoring piece could look. But then it’s unclear how willing (if at all) Trump would be to ‘pre-bunk’ Putin’s justifications like Biden did, let alone impose costs on any breaches.
Anyway, our sense is Zelensky has decided that the costs of any imperfect ceasefire are currently outweighed by the benefits of
a)
re-positioning himself as part of the solution, and thereby
b)
stabilising ties with Trump, who still holds critical cards for Ukraine. Oddly enough, Putin may well make the same calculation for Russia if he agrees to this temporary ceasefire.
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇵🇰
Pakistan
: Authorities have rescued 155 hostages taken by ethnic Baloch separatists who
hijacked a train and kidnapped hundreds of passengers
. The group had been demanding the release of Baloch prisoners held by Pakistan.
🇵🇹
Portugal
: Lawmakers have
toppled Portugal’s centre-right government
, likely sending voters to their third election in three years. The snap ballot could come in May, but that might still delay critical decisions around increased defence spending and privatising the country’s main airline.
🇦🇺
Australia
: Canberra has said it
won’t impose reciprocal tariffs on US goods
despite DC declining its long-time ally any exemption on steel and aluminium like it did under Trump 1.0. Responding to the tariffs, Australia’s prime minister said "
this is against the spirit of our two nations' enduring friendship
".
🇨🇴
Colombia
: The new defence minister, a retired general, has said he’ll
focus on reclaiming parts of Colombia taken by resurgent rebel groups
. One group (FARC-EMC) just released 28 police officers and a soldier it kidnapped in the country’s west, as President Petro’s ‘total peace’ strategy falters.
🇬🇭
Ghana
: Ghana’s air force is reportedly
struggling to maintain its fleet of Soviet-era aircraft
due to Western sanctions on Russia. The supply chain disruption is apparently starting to impact local operations, including UN peacekeeping missions and critical powerline patrols.
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Leaders on the move ✈️
🇺🇸
US
spymaster Tulsi Gabbard is
travelling to Japan, India and Thailand this week
, then stopping in France en route home.
🇮🇷
Iran’s
defence minister, Aziz Nasirzadeh, is visiting Russian ally
Belarus
.
🎖️
NATO
chief Mark Rutte
will be in Washington
from today through the 14th, meeting Trump tomorrow (Thursday) and overlapping in town with both Ireland’s PM and Ontario’s premier.
🇱🇦
The foreign minister of
Laos
is
visiting neighbouring China this week
, holding talks with his counterpart Wang Yi.
🇸🇾
The European Commission has invited
Syria’s
foreign minister, al-Shaibani, to its
donors conference on March 17th
.
🇨🇳
And Iranian, Russian, and
Chinese
officials will meet in Beijing on Friday to hold
talks described as focusing on Iran’s nuclear program
.
TOY OF THE DAY
Credits: Lego.
Guess the world’s largest toymaker? Okay fine, we already stole our own thunder in the image above, but it’s Denmark’s Lego. While the global toy market just shrunk 1% last year, Lego’s revenue grew a cool 13% as kids choose blocks over Barbies apparently.
The firm’s top market is the US, though most of its colourful bricks in the US are made at Lego’s factory in Monterrey, Mexico. The Danes are working on a new factory in Virginia, but that won’t be humming until 2027. And Trump’s next tariffs are due to hit on April 2.
Oh, and for our language nerds (you know who you are), Lego is a shortening of leg godt, which translates as
“play well”
.
DAILY POLL
Do you think Russia will agree to a 30-day ceasefire?
👍 Yep, it needs the break
👎 Nope, it'll keep pushing its demands
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
How do you feel about Romania's ban on Georgescu?
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
👋
Good riddance, he benefited from Russian interference  (59%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️
😩
Urrgh, you don't fight interference with interference (38%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write us!) (3%)
Your two cents:
👋
R.L:
“Action needs to be taken at some point and the longer democracies take to respond, the harder it gets to do it.”
😩
B.P:
“I'm extremely concerned about Georgescu's assault on democracy and the interference by Russia; at the same time, it would be a massive hit to credibility when Romania applies these bans in such a fashion.”
✍️
U.E:
“Really? You can't see that this was an EU coup?”
✍️ J.S:
“I see a near future where everyone accuses everyone of foreign interference. This will be led by the interfering states to mask their own interference. The problem is global.”
Was this forwarded to you? We're a team of ex-diplomats producing a concise and engaging geopolitical briefing for 120k+ leaders each day.
It’s free to subscribe
.
The content is not intended to provide legal, tax, or investment advice.
No money is being solicited or will be accepted until the offering statement for a particular offering has been qualified by the SEC. Offers may be revoked at any time. Contacting Masterworks involves no commitment or obligation.
“Net Annualized Return” refers to annualized internal rate of return net of all fees and expenses, calculated from the offering closing date to the date the sale is consummated. For additional information regarding the calculation of IRR for a particular investment in an artwork that has been sold, a reconciliation will be filed as an exhibit to Form 1-U and will be available on the SEC’s website.
Amount ‘distributed back’ represents the total liquidation proceeds distributed back to investors, net of all fees, expenses and proceeds reinvested in Masterworks offerings, of all works Masterworks has exited to date.
This communication is sent exclusively from Masterworks and is not endorsed by or affiliated with UBS.  Masterworks did not contribute to the creation of the referenced content.  The report is not intended to be regarded as investment advice, an offer, or solicitation of an offer to enter into any Masterworks offering.