URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/reduced-size-template-74d5470e3bf59dea
Title: 🌍 Venezuela’s moving parts

Today’s briefing:
— Venezuela’s moving parts
— The odds of China invading Taiwan are…
— This selfie speaks volumes
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. If there’s ever a silver lining to giving up your Sundays to “
monitor
” big geopolitical events, it’s surely the top-notch memes produced as collateral. Thankfully we got a bit of that this past couple of days, including a pearler which read, “
suddenly everyone in DC is a Venezuela expert
”. Touché.
In all seriousness though, Team Intrigue has been floored by the quality of the analysis we’ve seen in the Intrigue WhatsApp group chat since the Venezuela operation unfolded. It’s a testament to what an incredible community of geopolitical (and meme!) enthusiasts we’ve built around the world.
We hope you’ll join us by referring Intrigue to your friends and anyone you may want to impress. And now, onto today’s briefing focused on
Venezuela’s many moving parts
.
Gig of the day
Chrystia Freeland
That’s Canada’s former foreign and deputy prime minister, who has just accepted a job as President Zelensky’s economic advisor in Ukraine (unpaid
👀
).
Now what?
A shackled Nicolás Maduro used his first brief Manhattan court appearance Monday to argue he’s
a
) innocent,
b
) still the president of Venezuela, and
c
) a decent man.
On
a)
(I’m innocent)
, the 92-year-old judge (Hellerstein) might eventually get us an answer, though there are some big hurdles ahead — eg, Maduro will claim head-of-state immunity, a ploy that never worked for Panama’s Noriega (the courts deferred to DC). And the DOJ has now dropped its claim the
Cartel de los Soles
(Venezuelan slang for military corruption) is an actual cartel. It’ll be a couple of years before any verdict.
On
b)
(I’m president)
, the Italian-born head of Venezuela’s constitutional court (D’Amelio) has already confirmed Maduro’s veep (Rodriguez) is now in charge.
And on
c)
(I’m decent)
, the ~seven million Venezuelans who’ve fled Maduro’s disastrous regime, or the ~20,000 killed extrajudicially before reaching the border, might disagree.
Meanwhile, Trump officials and advisors keep offering
diverging statements
: Miller said it’s an
“ongoing military operation”,
Waltz told the UN it’s a “
law enforcement operation
”, Hegseth revealed that however you describe it, the move involved 200 US boots on the ground, and Rubio keeps doubling down on the Donroe Doctrine (this is our hemisphere).
But some big questions still loom large, like…
Was this just an oil grab?
Recall the ancestors to majors like
Exxon and Chevron
were investing in Venezuela a century ago, but a nationalist president (Pérez) eventually halted that party by nationalising US assets in 1976. Compared to the later radical Chavez-era appropriations, that ‘76 move was negotiated and compensated, but US firms still got burnt — they eventually acquiesced in hopes of retaining access via the new ‘PDVSA’ state oil firm.
But decades of corruption, ineptitude, politicisation, brain drain, and sanctions have seen
PDVSA’s output collapse by ~90%
since those heydeys. It’s now run (into the ground) by generals and other loyalists, part of Maduro’s strategy to secure loyalty via patronage.
So Trump is now pushing US oil interests front and centre, promising US majors will
“go in, spend billions, fix the badly broken infrastructure and start making money for the country.”
But
these generals won’t just hand over the keys to their font of wealth and security.
Even if you just snatched the keys,
Chevron is the only US firm with any real foothold
, and can’t simply walk back in and turn the ignition back on. You’re staring down a decade-long, $100B-wide barrel of capital investment to solve Venezuela’s unique geographic, infrastructural, and chemical challenges (it’s mostly extra-heavy sour crude).
And even if you write that big cheque,
will Venezuelan judges and generals respect it?
If so, for how long? Or will the country devolve into civil war? And at what point does Chevron’s interest clash with China’s interest (Caracas still owes billions).
For an industry that thinks in decades, already navigating the next energy transition, this sudden call to be the vanguard of a polarising and complex intervention is a tough sell. That’s why execs sound so cautious, even if markets have given US oil stocks a nice bump.
It’s all such a steep climb, we wonder the extent to which Trump’s
stolen asset
rhetoric might just be more
an attempt to justify his foreign adventurism
to a sceptical audience back home (only a ~third of Americans approve, divided along partisan lines).
The more immediate benefit from Maduro’s capture might be the way it blunts his claims over neighbouring Guyana’s vast oilfields, where US firms are already swimming in cash.
Anyway, those boardroom questions all lead us to….
Who is actually governing this place?
Legally it’s Maduro’s veep, Delcy Rodríguez, and she’s hustled early to get key factions lined up behind her, even getting an endorsement from Maduro's son while her own brother (head of the national assembly) runs interference behind the scenes.
So it’s still early days, but the purported logic of Trump’s targeted decapitation strategy is holding for now:
the same regime holds the reins
, with neither rival elites, armed
colectivos
, criminal groups, nor guerrillas rushing to disrupt the status quo (yet).
But that can change in an instant — overnight bursts of palace gunfire (seemingly at drones) reveal the jitters, while those
colectivo
paramilitaries
are already cracking down again; they mostly just answer to the regime’s powerful interior minister (Cabello).
And that’s before we get to the
beleaguered opposition
, which finally united out of sheer desperation against Maduro, with 67% of folks voting him out rather than necessarily aligning with any single vision for what comes next. And yet Trump’s move has legitimised his veep instead.
So that maybe leaves an opposition fractured again, just now into those who’ll
a
) engage pragmatically with Rodríguez,
b
) demand an immediate transition, and
c
) go extreme.
Machado (of Nobel fame) says she’ll now return to Venezuela asap, potentially setting up a dilemma for Trump: what’s his response when she ends up in some Chavista cell, particularly now that she’s just
offered
to share her Nobel with Trump?
And that leads us to…
The lurking risk of (more) violence.
There’s always the chance a general or other insider could try their luck, though Maduro himself invested heavily in both carrots (patronage) and sticks (counter-intelligence) to mitigate that exact risk, and past
coups
have resolved without a full Sudan-style split.
That then leaves non-state actors like the narco-leftist
National Liberation Army
(ELN) operating across the Venezuela-Colombia border. It’s already vowed to confront Trump’s
“imperial plans”
and killed several Colombian officers in his name last month.
But it’s unclear how much it really wants a fight with Trump, versus how much it’s just using Trump as cover for the war it’s revived against Colombia for more than a year now.
A bigger risk might be the ELN exploiting
distracted security forces
in Colombia and Venezuela to seize more lucrative mining and drug trafficking corridors.
But the bottom line is this is all
completely unpredictable
right now, and that’s a core reason why even some of Trump’s supporters still voice unease. Megyn Kelly put it to her listeners like this: “
We're not great at going into these foreign countries, decapitating them at the leadership level, and then saying either we're going to steer the country to a better place or it's going to steer itself. Either one. Nine times out of 10, they don't work out well.
”
Intrigue’s Take
If a big part of Trump’s aim was to boot rivals like China, Russia, and Iran, then it’s a little wild Venezuelan state TV made a show of the veep warmly embracing all three ambassadors side-by-side in the front row at her inauguration. But maybe that’s the point: hug who you want, score your points, just don’t cross US lines. Though guess which regimes will be delighted if this all ends up a mess tying down US power and attention?
The other dynamic we’re tracking is across a broader Latin America that’s long accused successive US administrations of effectively
ignoring the region
. You can see it in the numbers: before WWII, around
half
of all US presidential trips abroad were to Latin America, but it’s been in decline ever since, accounting for a quarter of all trips through the 1960s, then dropping to ~15% in the latter half of the Cold War, and 5-10% ever since — Biden went three times, and Trump 1.0 visited once.
China’s Xi Jinping?
He’s been ~five times, visiting ~11 countries. And he’s not rolling in empty-handed either, but actually bankrolling some massive infrastructure. So to the extent the US ignored its own region because it felt it could, those days are clearly over.
But one lesson here is also to be careful what you wish for: when the US finally turned its gaze back towards Latin America, turns out it wasn’t with a chequebook and a smile. And that’s a worry for many in a region still bearing the scars of prior US interventions.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇨🇳
CHINA — No graphite for you.
Effective immediately, Beijing has just banned the export of ‘dual use’ goods to Japan — ie, anything that could benefit Japan’s military, beyond actual arms. The (very) lengthy list of impacted sectors includes aerospace, comms, chemicals, critical minerals, machinery, chips, and electronics. (
SCMP
)
Comment
: It’s another remarkable escalation in China’s ongoing spat over a single phrase by Japan’s new PM back in November, when she noted that a Chinese invasion of Taiwan could have big implications for Japan — we explored the saga
here
.
🇺🇦
UKRAINE
—
Spy reshuffle.
Vasyl Malyuk, who orchestrated last year’s spectacular
Operation Spiderweb
hits on strategic bombers deep in Russia, has stepped down as head of Ukraine’s main internal security service (the SBU) following pressure from President Zelensky. He’ll stay on as the SBU’s head of unconventional warfare. (
Guardian
)
Comment
: The ‘why’ here is unclear, with theories ranging from “the president just wants fresh faces” through to “the president is sidelining potential election rivals”. On that second theory, Zelensky also just removed his other star spymaster (the young Budanov), pulling him closer as his new chief of staff, which brings us to the third theory: “Malyuk’s downfall was orchestrated by Zelensky’s *former* chief of staff.”
🇰🇵
NORTH KOREA — Celebration bangs.
While you were popping off those champagne corks, North Korean dictator Kim Jong Un rang in the new year by popping off some ballistic missiles. Sunday’s illegal test launches came just hours before the democratic
South
’s president left for China, where the autocratic North will be on the agenda (more below). The tests also come just before Kim’s next big Workers Party congress in January or February, the first in five years. (
EuroNews
)
🇫🇷
FRANCE
—
Meet me in Paris.
The ‘Coalition of the Willing’ (… to do what?) is due to meet in Paris today (Tuesday) — the 35 Ukraine-friendly countries are discussing potential security guarantees for Ukraine, as part of ongoing peace talks. France’s Macron says he’s expecting “
concrete commitments
” from the group. (
EuroNews
)
🇲🇾
MALAYSIA
— International outcry.
India, France, and Malaysia have threatened X (né Twitter) with legal action after its Grok chatbot started allowing users to digitally denude folks when prompted. Elon Musk has pledged to crack down on the phenomenon. (
The Independent
)
🇦🇷
ARGENTINA — Lower risk.
A key metric tracking Argentina’s sovereign risk has hit its best level in seven years, as investors continue to trust President Milei’s market-friendly policies in the wake of last year’s surprise mid-term electoral success. (
Bloomberg
$)
🇬🇳
GUINEA — Broken promise.
General Doumbouya, who initially pledged not to run in elections after he seized power in a 2021 coup, has now claimed a North Korean-esque 87% win in last week’s elections. (
ABC
)
Comment
: We recently
explored
Guinea’s world-changing new iron ore operation, which has continued to shrug off the political intrigue for now.
Extra Intrigue
Here’s what folks are betting on, according to the latest Polymarket numbers:
🇮🇷
There are 28% odds
Iran’s
Khamenei won’t be leader after 31 March.
🇨🇴
There’s a 39% chance hard-right firebrand Abelardo de la Espriella will win
Colombia’s
presidential elections in May-June.
🇹🇼
And there’s an alarming 8% probability China will invade
Taiwan
by 30 June.
Selfie of the day
Say Xis! The first couples of South Korea (L) and China (R). Lee Jae Myung’s Twitter/X
If there’s one thing world leaders do just like the rest of us, it’s take selfies. We might’ve said “
use the bathroom
” but for all the rumours about Putin’s special ‘poop suitcase’ to avoid rival spies getting his DNA.
But where were we? Ah yes, selfies. The one above is interesting, not just because you can almost hear Xi’s exasperated exhale, nor because Korea’s President Lee snapped it on the China-made Xiaomi that Xi famously gifted (along with a quip about it being bugged). But also because the selfie comes amid a state visit to Beijing that’s turning heads because…
It’s the second such meeting between this US ally-rival duo in two months, and
Taiwanese intelligence is briefing outlets on Xi’s prerequisites for the summit, reportedly including for Lee to back Beijing’s stance on Taiwan and oppose certain US military moves in the region, in return for more tourists and fewer sanctions from China.
Today’s poll
What do you think of prediction markets like Polymarket?
👀 They can be useful to suss out the wider mood
❌ They're easily manipulated and often wrong
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
What do you think about the US capture of Maduro?
✅
It was necessary — someone had to oust him (32%)
❌
It was outrageous — the consequences will long linger (65%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (3%)
Your two cents:
❌
P.T:
“I don’t think any ‘superpower’ should be above International law (for what that is now worth!) and have the right to decide on another country’s governance. It sets a very frightening precedent and creates a level of international uncertainty about ‘what next’ that, with a wild card like Trump, could go anywhere.”
✅
M.T:
“I ask for those who think it's outrageous, what has international law  done for Venezuela?”
✍️
R.M.K:
“Depends on whether they have/had a plan for day 2. History will judge this based on its long term outcome.”
And an extra comment to ring in the new year:
✍️
V.F:
“Feels like we are in a world where we'll forget about this in one month.”