URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/venezuelan-opposition-leader-expelled-colombia
Title: 🌍 Venezuelan opposition leader expelled from Colombia

Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Remember this ol’ saying?
“Shoot for the moon. Even if you miss, you'll land among the stars.”
Well Sweden gave that a whirl on Monday, but its rocket ended up
hitting Norway instead
.
Today’s briefing is a 4.2 min read:
🇻🇪
Venezuela’s
fallen opposition leader lands unexpectedly in the US.
🇿🇦
Will
South Africa
arrest Vladimir Putin?
➕
Plus:
Nuclear umbrellas, how the papers are covering US-Philippines military exercises, and is Apple trying to become a bank?
🗺️ AROUND THE WORLD
🇰🇷
South Korea
: In a landmark deal, the US and South Korea have agreed a bigger role for Seoul in
shaping nuclear strategy
on the Korean Peninsula. In exchange, South Korea has undertaken not to pursue its own nuclear program.
🇺🇦
Ukraine
: Chinese President Xi Jinping and Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelensky
spoke over the phone
yesterday (Wednesday). Zelensky appointed a new ambassador to Beijing after the call, which he described as
“long and meaningful”.
🇦🇺
Australia
: Canberra announced yesterday (Wednesday) it’ll
accelerate its missile production program
. The announcement is part of a broader review of Australia’s defence strategy, which it said was launched in response to China’s military build-up in the region.
🇲🇽
Mexico
: The government’s migration chief was
arraigned on Tuesday
in connection with a deadly fire at a border detention centre last month. Authorities say he knowingly declined to improve conditions at the facility.
🇱🇧
Lebanon
: An alleged financier for designated Lebanese terrorist group Hezbollah has
appeared in a US court
after being extradited by Romania. He’ll face sanctions evasion and money laundering charges.
🇻🇪
VENEZUELA | POLITICS
Venezuelan opposition figure Juan Guaidó, left, and President Nicolás Maduro, right.
Venezuelan opposition figure lands in the US
Briefly:
Venezuelan opposition figure Juan Guaidó landed unexpectedly in the US on Tuesday after
an action-packed 48 hours
. It’s now unclear if or when he’ll ever return to Venezuela.
Here’s what happened:
On Monday, Guaidó crossed unlawfully into Colombia on foot, after what he said was a 60 hour journey from Venezuela’s capital.
He then tried to take a flight from a border town to Colombia’s capital, for a summit on Venezuela’s future (to which he wasn’t invited).
But when Colombia hinted at his possible deportation, the US got him a ticket to Miami instead and local authorities escorted him to the gate.
Just four years ago,
Guaidó was greeted as a hero in the very same border town
. Three Latin American presidents received him there, and he even featured at a Live Aid concert organised by Richard Branson.
But despite being recognised as Venezuela’s leader by 50 countries at the time, Guaidó struggled to actually oust incumbent Nicolás Maduro from power. And so Guaidó’s influence waned, and his parallel government was
disbanded
.
Intrigue’s take:
Two quick lessons here. First, while Maduro’s 2018 re-election was widely seen as a sham, he still managed to hold tight to key levers of power like the security forces. And in Venezuela, that’s still ultimately what matters.
But second, many of Guaidó’s top backers abroad were subsequently swept from power in Latin America’s ‘
pink tide
’. So his influence was fading at home
and
abroad. After this week, it’s hard to see him regaining that influence anywhere.
Also worth noting:
The US, EU and Latin American countries are trying to
negotiate a democratic resolution
to Venezuela’s crisis, potentially involving the relaxation of sanctions in return for credible 2024 elections.
In 2019, the US imposed strict financial sanctions on Venezuela and pledged
$52 million in support for Juan Guaidó’s
efforts to oust Nicolás Maduro.
📰
GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES
How different newspapers covered
: The recent
US-Philippines joint naval exercises.
Links
:
The Straits Times
,
SMH
,
Global Times
.
Today’s briefing is sponsored by
Hubspot
You can mull, moan, mourn… but there’s 24 hours in a day.
If you find yourself wishing for more, consider us facilitators — this free HubSpot ebook will help you master time management and punch the metaphorical workplace clock with pride.
Also included are four productivity templates that will help you spruce up your process.
So stop slackin’ and get crackin’…
Download here!
🇿🇦
SOUTH AFRICA | GEOPOLITICS
South African President Cyril Ramaphosa (left) has a tough decision to make.
Will South Africa arrest Vladimir Putin?
Briefly:
South Africa’s presidential office has
walked back comments
by President Ramaphosa, who said the country should leave the International Criminal Court (ICC) after it issued an arrest warrant for Vladimir Putin.
The president’s office said
his comments on Tuesday were “erroneous”.
But South Africa will have to sort its plans out soon.
In August, it’s due to host Russia’s president for
a BRICS summit
, but South Africa’s ICC membership obliges it to detain Putin and hand him over to The Hague for trial.
Intrigue’s take:
This all underscores two big things:
Countries may try to chart a middle course between the West and Russia, but South Africa’s current predicament is a reminder of how often this world can still force us all to make a choice eventually, and
One way or another, it’s unlikely Putin will be nabbed in South Africa. But that won’t mean the ICC has failed. To the contrary, the current uncertainty in Pretoria (
and Moscow
) is proof the ICC warrant is shaping international behaviour.
Also worth noting:
South Africa first considered leaving the ICC in 2015, when the government
declined to arrest
then Sudanese dictator Omar al-Bashir while hosting an African Union summit.
Even if South Africa decides to leave the ICC, it’ll still be treaty-bound to fulfil its ICC obligations (like arresting Putin) for 12 months.
👀
EXTRA INTRIGUE
What we’re reading about
all things Apple.
Will Apple take a big bite out of the banks?
Why Apple is betting big on India
($)
Apple is making it easy to borrow money. What could go wrong?
Apple might make MacBooks in Thailand
($)
📊
INFOGRAPHIC OF THE DAY
*NATO country with nuclear weapons. Credits: World101
In light of
recent reports
about a new deployment of US nuclear-armed subs to South Korea, here’s a look at the 29 other countries currently under the US ‘nuclear umbrella’ (the term for a security guarantee by a nuclear weapons state).
Update: Finland joined NATO (and the US nuclear umbrella) on 4 April 2023.
🗳️ POLLTIME!
Do you think nuclear umbrellas help decrease the number of nuclear weapons in the world?
🕊️ Yes, if states know they're protected, they won't have to acquire nuclear arms of their own
☢️ No, big nuclear umbrellas lead to arms races
🖋️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll: Do you think China's carbon emissions will peak before 2030, as pledged by Xi?
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 👍 Yes, China has the will and the way to make it happen (24%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
👎 No, that's unrealistic (73%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 🖋️ Other (write in!)  (3%)
Your two cents:
👍
G.L:
“Given China's huge investment in all aspects of clean energy tech (solar, batteries, hydro, etc), it seems probable that the coal boom is a temporary fix to the current energy shortage.”
👎
S.C:
“China has similar issues as the US and others: Building out their transmission grid to accommodate the massive increase in renewable generation assets across the country. This is a very expensive and long process and makes the targeted 2030 date unrealistic.”
🖋️
O.S:
“[…] the target itself is way too unambitious to achieve the Paris Goal - China needs to cut emissions much sooner.”