URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/friday-5239
Title: 🌍 Venezuela's Belarus factor

Today’s briefing:
— Another dictator in Venezuela
— A suspicious ambassadorial death?
— Intrigue’s person of the year is…
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. As Intrigue’s token parent (for now!), I am painfully aware of the “
six-sevven
” viral trend simultaneously sweeping and baffling our world — paired with a hand gesture, it originates from Skrilla's
Doot Doot (6 7)
track.
So, before we connect some
wild dots between two dictators in Venezuela and Eastern Europe
, here’s my carefully curated compilation of the world’s best 6-7 headlines:
The UK’s PM had to apologise after starting a banned 6-7 dance at a school
A Canadian lawmaker did the 6-7 dance while announcing 67,000 new jobs
McDonald’s in the UAE started offering free nuggets between 6 and 7, and
Legendary burger chain
In-N-Out
has gone the other way, pulling the number 6-7 from its ticketing system because of all the mayhem it’s been causing in stores.
With that over, let’s talk about the weird link between Venezuela’s Maduro (who took 67% of the votes in 2018), and Belarus’s Lukashenko (who once claimed a ~67% margin).
Number of the day
1.4%
That’s how much US house prices dropped over the past three months according to CNBC — it’s the first drop in two years amid high inventories, mortgage rates, and economic uncertainty.
Days numbered?
Two crucial but seemingly unconnected things happened this week:
The US seized an oil tanker off the coast of Venezuela, and
An Eastern European dictator met a Venezuelan ambassador.
Now let’s connect some dots:
Dot 1
- Tuesday 10 December: the US attorney-general publishes a
video
of US troops descending from a chopper onto an oil tanker, with a caption that they “
executed a seizure warrant for a crude oil tanker used to transport sanctioned oil from Venezuela and Iran
”.
The tanker, named the ‘Skipper’, has been under US sanctions since 2022 on allegations it’s part of an illegal oil shipping network (it spoofs its location and uses false flags).
Dot 2
- Thursday 11 December: the Venezuelan ambassador to Russia walks into a richly decorated room in the Belarusian presidential palace to meet dictator Aleksandr Lukashenko, their second sit-down within three weeks.
We’re not privy to their chat, but it’s weird for an envoy to get so much presidential access so far from home. And Lukashenko did hint the pair had previously “
agreed that [the ambassador] should clear some matters with the leadership of Venezuela
”. Interesting…
No clear picture yet?
Let’s add some background.
On the Venezuela side, President Trump is clearly
hustling to oust Maduro
— you can connect the dots, whether…
Doubling
the US bounty on Maduro’s head to $50M
Deploying
the Caribbean’s biggest naval build-up since the Cold War
Blowing
alleged narco-boats out of the water
Threatening
to start hitting targets on land, and now…
Buzzing
jets over the Gulf of Venezuela (which Caracas claims).
But if you don’t feel like connecting any dots, you can also just listen to Trump at this point — he said the loud bit louder this week, warning Maduro’s “
days are numbered
”.
Outlets in Miami (with a large Venezuelan diaspora) and beyond suggest it’s working: there are reports Maduro has offered to step down if the US drops sanctions and grants full amnesty for him and his family. But if you’re wondering how Trump responded, the US just
expanded
its sanctions to now include three of Maduro’s nephews. I.e., offer denied.
So here’s where Lukashenko comes in.
Dot 3
- Putin is one of Maduro’s few remaining ‘friends’, while the ex-Soviet Belarus is virtually one of Putin’s vassal states at this point: Lukashenko hosts some of Putin’s nukes, and even let Putin invade Ukraine from Belarusian territory!
But then curiously, that
friendship triangle
becomes a bit of a square because of the Trump administration’s move to thaw US ties with Belarus. While these efforts have yielded some transactional results (Lukashenko released a bunch of political prisoners), the broader US strategy in Belarus isn’t entirely clear, with theories ranging from…
Maybe Trump wants to peel Belarus away from Putin, to
Maybe Trump wants to influence Putin via Belarus.
Either way, this friendship square now seems to have produced Maduro’s most plausible off-ramp to date: he’s rejected any exile in Russia (too far), while the US rejects any exile in Cuba (too close).
So Belarus is emerging as the hybrid option maybe everyone can accept:
It’s tolerable for Maduro
, who ends up on the edge of Europe but with Russian-backed security, without having to back-track on his own Russia rejection, and
It’s tolerable for the US
, as it side-lines Cuba without emboldening anyone else (like Putin) theoretically capable of undermining US power in its own region.
Dot 4
- So when Lukashenko publicly encouraged Maduro to come visit Belarus the other day, he might’ve been a little more serious than we realised.
Intrigue’s Take
There was a sneaky detail above that’s worth exploring further: the US is accusing the ship it seized off Venezuela of transporting oil
for Venezuela and Iran
.
These two rogue players (along with North Korea, Russia, and others) don’t have much in common beyond their shared interest in ushering in a post-US-led world. But it’s actually in oil markets where their cooperation goes beyond photo opps and press releases.
While both Iran and Venezuela face oil sanctions, Iran’s are tougher and more strictly enforced. As soon as Iran loads oil at its
Kharg Island
, that triggers red flags everywhere. The result is the shadow fleet servicing Venezuela has maintained more access to insurance and ports, enabling it to offload its oil at higher prices.
Venezuela’s waters (especially around Amuay and José terminal) are also among the few places left where massive dark-fleet transfers can still happen with almost no oversight.
So Iran has no shortage of oil, but blending its crude with Venezuela’s output (where technically possible)
solves lots of problem
s. Ditto, seizing the Skipper sends a message to two US foes at once.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
Semafor
What Washington reads to stay ahead.
Semafor Washington, DC is a daily briefing trusted by those who shape policy and power. In an era of deep polarization and global uncertainty, each edition delivers rare clarity that illuminates the conversations within Congress, the West Wing, and the discreet spaces of power where decisions are made. They recently released
Architects of the New Economy
, an interactive map revealing the people and networks redefining economic power in Washington. Stay up to date on everything happening behind closed doors —
sign up to Semafor Washington, DC for free.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇺🇦
UKRAINE  — Special zone.
President Zelensky has said the US is pushing for Ukraine to withdraw from parts of the Donbas region it still controls, to establish a special economic zone as part of a peace deal with Russia. Details on who would administer the region and provide security guarantees aren’t yet clear. (
CNN
)
Comment:
The Ukrainian leader also insists any territorial changes would need a referendum, though we just highlighted the
problems
around holding any vote.
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES — To the Senate!
The US House has finally passed its huge new $901B defence bill, with the president pledging to sign once it clears the Senate next week. Highlights include i) $400M in military assistance to Ukraine per year, ii) limits on troop reductions in Europe and South Korea, iii) directions to boost Indo-Pac defence ties, and iv) initiatives aimed at countering China (eg, a new ambassador to the Indian Ocean region). (
AEI
)
Comment:
Blocking out the usual noise, the signal from Congress seems pretty clear: whatever remains of DC’s bipartisan centre of gravity is coalescing around a push-back on some of the White House’s alliance scepticism (the Europeans were rattled if not surprised by the searing language in last week’s US National Security Strategy).
🇹🇲
TURKMENISTAN — But, I’m a published author!
Turkmen leader Serdar Berdymukhamedov has published his fourth book, this time to mark the 30th anniversary of the country legislating its own permanent neutrality. (
Eurasianet
)
Comment:
Maybe all that neutrality frees up diplomat calendars a little? The Turkmen foreign ministry launched the president’s book with a student choir singing a catchy lil’ ditty titled “Neutrality is Our Eternal Happiness’.
🇵🇹
PORTUGAL — Solidarity forever?
Portugal’s first general strike in over a decade has halted transport as workers protest major proposed labour reforms. The government says Portugal, tracking as the eurozone’s fastest growing economy, needs looser contracting and outsourcing rules to reach its potential. Unions say it’s an assault on worker rights. (
BBC
)
🇹🇭
THAILAND
— Must we do this
now
?
As Thailand’s border conflict with Cambodia rages into its fifth day, the Thai king has endorsed PM Charnvirakul’s bid to call early elections. The PM was heading off a no-confidence vote by an opposition party irked by his reneging on a promised referendum that could’ve curbed the establishment’s grip on power. (
Reuters
)
🇧🇷
BRAZIL — Left in the dark.
High winds and fallen trees have triggered a blackout in São Paulo, leaving some 1.4 million folks without electricity while grounding hundreds of flights in and out of Brazil’s largest city. Private-owned utility Enel is copping criticism. (
AP
)
🇪🇬
EGYPT — Take it off our hands, pls.
Egypt has opened bidding for private management of Hurghada International Airport, 450km (280mi) from Cairo. It’s part of a broader IMF and IFC-backed privatisation across 11 airports to help balance Egypt’s books. (
AfricaNews
)
Comment
: With current IMF financing terms due to expire some time in the next year, the IMF has been pushing Egypt to go harder — Intriguers may recall Egypt already sold a chunk of prime Mediterranean beachfront to the UAE for $35B last year.
Extra Intrigue
In diplomacy news 🗞️
Ambassadors:
Russia’s long-serving ambassador to the DPRK
died aged 70 this week
, with state outlets merely describing his demise as “
unexpected
”.
👀
Outreach:
The Finns in Washington are known for their hard-to-get sauna invite, so the Norwegians are countering with
“thirst trap diplomacy”
,
which involves the young embassy chef putting on a gun show for Insta. Ambassador Anniken Huitfeldt (Norway’s former FM) once told Intrigue she knew young Eilif was a star, and poached him from Norway’s embassy in Paris.
Consular:
The US and South Korea have jointly
launched a visa support desk
in America’s Seoul embassy to avoid a repeat of September’s fiasco, which saw US authorities detain 300 Korean workers at a joint Hyundai-LG battery plant.
Cover of the day
Credits: Time Magazine.
The
cowards
folks at Time Magazine have ditched their standard
one
individual as the Person of the Year, instead naming ‘
The Architects of AI
’ for 2025. To be fair, they’ve done this before — Steve Jobs famously lost out to the personal computer in 1982.
Anyway, the cover up on the right features several of the more established players from Meta, X, OpenAI, Deepmind, Anthropic, and Nvidia (Huang) plus his ~cousin (Lisa Su) who happens to head up AMD. The lower-profile name perched over on the right is Stanford’s Fei-Fei Li, the computer vision guru who founded her own startup (World Labs) last year.
All worthy folks, but we’ll be brave and name the one AI architect having the biggest impact on the world this year… Nvidia’s Jensen Huang.
Friday Quiz
Millions today (Friday) mark the Feast of Our Lady of Guadalupe.
Where did this Catholic tradition first emerge?
🇲🇽 Mexico
🇪🇸 Spain
🇧🇷 Brazil
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
How many pilgrims visit Guadalupe's Basilica each year?
(approx)
5M
10M
50M
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
What flower do pilgrims typically offer?
Dandelions
Roses
Tulips
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate