URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/water-gone-wild
Title: 🌍 Water gone wild

Today’s briefing:
— Water gone wild
— Ambassador’s secret guest
— NYC names a street after…
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Thanks to those who joined Intrigue’s ‘
Artificial Intelligence and the World Order
’ event at the Australian embassy in DC last night. The speakers and canapés were rated a solid 10/10 from Intriguers who attended.
Needless to say, it’s tough to tackle a subject as ubiquitous as AI. I’m so impressed our speakers guided the audience through the technology’s foundations and where it’s headed, its geopolitical implications and impact on the Global South, then into the exciting use cases for AI in the economy and for our democracy.
We’re thrilled to have shared a great evening with the DC Intrigue community and to partner with our friends at the Aussie embassy.
Now, onto today’s story on some
big water stories
from this week.
P.S
: We’re hosting a happy hour with Leadership Connect on
December 4th
in Washington, DC.
In town? Join us!
Number of the day
100
That’s roughly how many minutes it took the S&P500 to lose $1.5
trillion
in market cap yesterday (Thursday). In the absence of any obvious trigger, it hints at more market jitters.
Cry me a river
When it comes to liquids and geopolitics, oil is like Alec Baldwin getting all the glory for
30 Rock
, while poor lil’ brother Stephen (water) cranks out under-loved hits like
Bio-Dome
.
So let’s right that wrong via
three intriguing water tales you should know:
Iran is running out
With rainfall 85% below average and key reservoirs now circling the drain, Iran’s six consecutive years of drought are taking their toll.
What’s going on?
The country’s average temperatures have risen 1.5°C+ since the 1970s, driving drier conditions that make extreme droughts more likely. Iran itself has also made things worse by
mismanaging
its groundwater, subsidising water-intensive crops, and building too many dams, while sanctions have curbed some access to better tech and infrastructure.
The answer?
Authorities are already rationing water in parts, with Tehran residents now seeing water pressure dip at night, but this might just be the start. The president has even flagged the possibility of evacuating the capital’s 10 million locals as a last resort — this seems logistically infeasible, but it gives you a sense of the panic.
So for now, authorities are relying on the power of positive thinking and cloud seeding (spraying chemicals to trigger rain), though it might not be enough.
Aside from the humanitarian hit, it’ll all further erode the regime’s dwindling credibility.
Putin’s pipedream
Russian scientists have
reportedly
(
🇷🇺
) asked the Kremlin to fund a feasibility study on diverting water from Russia’s Ob river down to Central Asia.
The idea is to blow $100B on a massive plastic pipeline carrying up to 22 cubic km (5.3 cubic mi) of water through Kazakhstan and into Uzbekistan each year. Why?
First
, the above Russian outlet (like most) aligns with
Kremlin narratives
, particularly since Berezkin took over in 2017. Putin doesn’t have a spare $100B or workforce for this project, but pumping out these articles helps project the guy as a historic nation-builder.
Second
, this idea actually builds on a
similar Soviet proposal
from the 1970s to replenish the Aral Sea basin — wedged between Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan, it was once the fourth-largest body of inland water but is now mostly dried up due to agriculture.
And
third
, like that original 1970s proposal, this modern iteration would have the added benefit of not only helping alleviate Central Asia’s water crisis, but also offering Putin a
new source of leverage
over a region now looking to break from Moscow’s orbit.
Still, it’s a pipedream. Which will we get first, this Central Asian water pipeline or GTA 6?
India’s withdrawal
With so much going on, you might’ve missed the incredibly bland-sounding ‘Neutral Expert proceedings’ now happening in Vienna.
It’s part of India and Pakistan’s 1960
Indus River Treaty
that regulates distribution of their shared basin. India paused its treaty participation after April’s terrorist attack by Pakistan-based extremists, but an international court basically
found
the treaty still holds.
And that’s what makes
this week’s Vienna meeting
intriguing: Pakistan is now there raising objections to hydroelectric projects planned by India, which isn’t there to respond.
But interestingly, it’s not a complete no-show by India: Delhi still shared river-flow data during the monsoon season, just via its embassy rather than the official treaty channel.
It’s a way of flexing its leverage while managing the humanitarian and reputational risks.
Intrigue’s Take
The century ahead may well reveal a future in which water replaces oil as the liquid most likely to trigger a conflict — but unlike oil, there aren’t alternatives to water. So how might this all play out?
We’re already seeing
water haves and have-nots
: upstream haves (like Ethiopia, India, and China) are making their downstream neighbours (Egypt, Pakistan, and Mekong nations) very nervous with more dams — hold back water (like China) and distant Mekong rice harvests and fisheries get hammered. Open the spigot and they get hit with floods.
At least in the India-Pakistan case, there’s a treaty providing some basic guardrails. As for the Mekong? Those Southeast Asian neighbours set up the
Mekong River Commission
in 1995, but guess who’s still not a full member? The upstream giant, China! Beijing prefers sitting in the driver’s seat of its own non-binding equivalent.
But you know what?
As with energy,
tech might expand our water options
, too: just last month Israel started quietly pumping desalinated seawater into the Sea of Galilee, raising its drought-hit levels by 0.5cm a month in a world first. Throw in some cheap intermittent solar to power the pumps and desal, and all kinds of possibilities emerge.
Alternatively you could do nothing, though history offers plenty of examples (whether the Mayans, the Ming Dynasty, or Ancien Régime France) of eras partly washed away by drought.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
Face Off
The U.S.–China relationship generates constant headlines, from skipped G20 meetings to negotiations that could shape Taiwan’s future.
Face-Off
is an award-winning podcast that cuts through the noise to deliver you the real story, with essential historical context. Hosted by Jane Perlez, longtime foreign correspondent for The New York Times,
Face-Off
is an inside look at the turbulent relationship between these two superpowers, the men in charge, and the vital issues that affect us all.
Tune into Season 3 today!
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇿🇦
SOUTH AFRICA — Missing guests.
World leaders are landing in South Africa ahead of the weekend’s G20 summit, though there’ll be several high-profile absences like President Trump, Argentina’s Milei, China’s Xi, and Russia’s Putin (still dodging his ICC arrest warrant). (
ABC
)
Comment
: With the G20 now divided among its biggest members, and still lacking the kind of core purpose that first really thrust it onto centre stage amid the 2008 financial crisis, attendance is rarely 100%. For the US host year in 2026, the big question will be whether China’s Xi makes a cameo.
🇨🇳
CHINA — Ferry to Taiwan?
A Reuters investigation appears to have confirmed reports that China mobilised a fleet of civilian vessels to run major landing drills over the summer, in a seeming rehearsal for a potential invasion of Taiwan. (
Reuters
)
🇵🇰
PAKISTAN
—
Let there be land.
Pakistan is reclaiming land to build an artificial island 30km (19mi) out to sea, as an all-weather platform to ramp up its oil and gas exploration. (
Dawn
)
Comment:
Among other drivers, this oil and gas boom is an attempt to cut Pakistan’s import costs, stabilise its forex shortages, and boost its leverage with major powers. It might also explain why PM Sharif has ended up skipping Brazil’s COP climate talks, though his niece has appeared in her capacity as head of Punjab state.
🇪🇺
EUROPEAN UNION — Grilling season.
US tech giant Amazon is hoping its offer to Zoom a senior exec in for a parliamentary grilling might soothe the EU’s legislature, which has lately restricted Amazon’s lobby access amid frustration the firm keeps sending junior Brussels benchwarmers to answer questions about employee conditions. (
Euractiv
)
Comment
: It might seem a bit odd for a firm to repeatedly diss the lawmakers representing its second-largest market. But our sense is the world’s 5th-largest company has calculated that sending senior execs for an in-person hearing involves real reputational risks (think of the viral soundbites) with minimal upside, so playing cat-and-mouse with a committee is the least-worst option.
🇹🇴
TONGA
— Who’s in charge?
Tonga’s king is due to land in China today, as voters back home await the outcome of yesterday’s elections. (
China’s government
)
Comment
: Tonga’s royal family has recently moved to retake some of the powers it surrendered from 2010, with the crown prince emerging as both foreign and defence minister in January. That might all explain the low voter turnout. As for this China trip? Tonga still owes Beijing ~$120M (a quarter of its GDP!) in loans that helped it rebuild after 2006 riots left most of Chinatown in ruins.
🇧🇷
BRAZIL — That’s NOT in the show run.
An unexplained fire has hit Brazil’s COP climate venue, barely a week after the UN wrote local authorities a stern letter voicing concerns about safety hazards. (
AP
)
Comment
: The resulting evacuation halted climate talks for most of Thursday, with negotiations still not even close to finishing by the nominal end date today (Friday). Fun fact, but the last COP to finish on time was Italy’s Milan summit in 2003.
🇿🇲
ZAMBIA — On wheels.
China’s premier (Li) has pledged $1.4B to modernise a railway that’ll transport copper from resource-rich nations in Africa’s south to Indian Ocean ports for export. (
CGSP
)
Comment
: Why? China is the world’s largest copper consumer and wants to secure its supplies. The US and EU are financing a similar project to revive a railway headed west across Africa to Angola’s Atlantic coast.
Extra Intrigue
Diplomat news of the week 🗞️
Spies:
It turns out the US ambassador to Israel
secretly hosted
Jonathan Pollard at the US embassy in Jerusalem over the summer — Pollard was the US naval intelligence analyst who famously did 30 years for selling secrets to the Israelis.
Humiliation:
China has
leaked
a viral 20-second clip of a Japanese official seemingly bowing apologetically during his high-stakes visit, while Japan’s own
bolder version
(
🇯🇵
) of events went viral the same day (we explored it all
here
).
Honour:
South Africa is
adding
a 1970s-era junior Australian diplomat (now deceased) to its
Wall of Names
honouring those who resisted apartheid.
Street of the day
Credits: EstonianMFA, X
New York City officials unveiled Ernst Jaakson Way on East 34th Street this week — it’s a sliver of asphalt better known for funnelling motorists towards the Midtown Tunnel and out into Queens, than for hosting legends of international diplomacy.
But Ernst Jaakson was no ordinary envoy, dear Intriguer. The Estonian diplomat spent
66 years
representing Tallinn in New York, including the half century when occupying Soviets tried to erase his independent Estonia from the map. Remarkably, Jaakson just kept showing up to work, issuing passports, lobbying Washington, and keeping the spirit alive.
That might be why the foreign minister of Estonia (a NATO ally) was there to help cut the ribbon this week. If you're in the Big Apple, check it out!
Friday Quiz
A water quiz, obviously.
1) What % of the world's water is freshwater?
~ 3%
~ 7%
~ 15%
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) What's the world's biggest freshwater lake?
(by volume)
Lake Superior (USA)
Lake Tanganyika (Central Africa)
Lake Baikal (Russia)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) Which of the following cities has the most expensive tap water?
(according to the Water Price Index)
Oslo
Brisbane
Hong Kong
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate