URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/reduced-size-template-4ba9ed4327499966
Title: 🌍 What Xi’s big parade was really about

Today’s briefing:
— What Xi’s big parade was really about
— Why they cancelled a fancy Russian cruise
— Stamp your feet
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. I headed to China for the World Artificial Intelligence Conference in Shanghai last month. Adjacent to the conference was the AI expo, which was an impressive (albeit overwhelming) display of China’s latest tech wares, ranging from advanced robotics to EVs.
The trip was highly productive for
my Labubu purchasing goals
scoping out China’s tech ecosystem, and certainly reminded of how seriously the country loves large-scale mega displays of fancy gadgets as a way to project strength and power.
We saw another mega display at
the 2025 ‘China Victory Day Parade’
in Beijing yesterday, which featured tanks (ahem), planes, and other assorted military arsenal rolling through Chang’An Avenue. That’s our top story for today.
Number of the day
7.2 million
That’s the number of unemployed workers in the US, surpassing job openings for the first time since 2021, according to Wednesday’s official figures. The weaker-than-expected data triggered an initial global bond sell-off.
Don’t rain on my parade
With the dust now settled after Xi Jinping’s big Victory Day parade, it’s time to ask… what exactly
was
that? A big flex aimed at the US? A rallying cry for the broader Global South? A Party pump-up for weary audiences watching back home?
Well here are the three things you should know.
Xi’s big speech.
President
Xi’s big speech had
three
big aims:
First
, by describing China’s war against Imperial Japan as its
“first complete victory against foreign aggression in modern times
”, Xi sought to
frame his Party
as the guardian of China’s sovereignty (see the debate below)
Second
, by then describing that victory as China’s
“major contribution to the salvation of human civilization and the defense of world peace”,
Xi sought to
frame his
country
as a guardian of
the world’s
progress and order, and…
Third
, by then describing today as a “
choice of peace or war, dialogue or confrontation, win-win or zero-sum
”, Xi sought to
frame this
moment
as a choice between two models: the West’s declining chaos or the East’s rising order.
Then there’s the backdrop of…
Weapons galore.
Xi’s parades are known for big reveals, and this week’s new toys included giant shipborne laser defences, robot wolves, drones, and China’s full nuclear triad (air, land and sea-launch). There were also crowd fave missiles like the ‘Dongfeng 26D’ (aka ‘Guam Killer’), the hypersonic YJ-21 (aka ‘carrier killer’), plus a ‘Dongfeng-5C’ (capable of hitting the US).
The message?
It was a home-made and modernised
flex
to warn that China can now hit targets near and far, so maybe the US and its allies should take a step back (then another).
For everyone else, it aimed to project a sense of
inevitability
(Xi used the term “
unstoppable
”) — ie, time to get with the program.
As for who got to watch all these toys rumble past…?
3. The guest list.
If parades are theatre, then maybe
the VIP balcony
was the real stage here: Xi stood shoulder-to-shoulder with Russia’s Putin and North Korea’s Kim, while others from Iran, Cuba, Myanmar, Malaysia, Zimbabwe, and beyond clapped along.
That’s a
pretty typical guest list
for anyone chafing against Brussels and Washington.
Serbia’s Vucic was also there, as was Slovakia’s Fico (the only
NATO/EU leader
, though others sent lower-level reps). They raised eyebrows, but this is still very on-brand for them both, as Beijing/Moscow-friendly nationalists happy to buck consensus when it suits.
A few
other Western-aligned
ex
-leaders
also turned up from New Zealand, Belgium, Greece, and even Japan (Hatoyama), though they maintained a pretty low profile: this kind of presence arguably maintains dialogue without endorsing the militarism or despots.
So what’s
Xi’s overall message?
He’s really positioning himself and his China as the head of a coalition of states pushing back on a US-led world order.
Intrigue’s Take
It’s been fascinating to watch the role of history at play here. Modern China traditionally
de
-emphasised WWII in favour of the Communist Party’s preferred revolutionary legitimacy and the 1949 founding of today’s People’s Republic. And of course, that 1949 date hints at why: Xi’s China didn’t even exist until four years after WWII ended.
Still,
the Communists
continue to argue they were the “
mainstay
” or “
backbone
” of China’s resistance against Imperial Japan all along, whereas…
The Nationalists
(in charge before the Communists pushed them out to Taiwan) say Chairman Mao ran a secret
70-20-10 Strategy,
putting
70%
into expanding Communist control,
20%
into fighting fellow Chinese (the ruling Nationalists), and just
10%
into limited guerrilla resistance against the Japanese occupiers.
And historical reality matches the Nationalist version more. Heck, Mao himself acknowledged this in response to Japan’s 1972 apology, quipping if it wasn’t for Japan’s invasion, China’s Communists would still be hiding up in the hills somewhere.
And to be clear, this isn’t about questioning
China
’s role in WWII — just the role claimed by Xi’s Communists.
So… who cares? Judging by Xi’s decision to host China’s first Victory Day parade a decade ago, and his second iteration just this week…
Xi cares!
Why?
There could be an entire series of Intrigue briefings on this, but here’s one:
As China’s economic miracle slows and a key pillar of the Party’s legitimacy fades (‘only we can deliver growth’), Xi has to lean more into his Party’s claims to historical legitimacy (‘only we could’ve ended China’s century of humiliation’).
Sound even smarter:
In a repeat of Xi’s 2015 Victory Day announcement, Xi announced a 300,000 reduction in the size of the People’s Liberation Army. It’s again about trimming administrative fat and re-investing savings into China’s military modernisation.
Kim’s attendance from North Korea was also interesting, his first trip abroad since 2019 and his first-ever appearance at (subject to your definition) a multilateral event rather than just a one-on-one. He likely wants more economic assistance from China, and might’ve also been signalling his daughter as his heir apparent (she was along for the ride).
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇮🇳
INDIA
-
Tax time?
Tax authorities have approved PM Modi’s sweeping reforms, simplifying the structure into two slabs which aim to both
a
) spur consumption by cutting taxes on everyday goods like clothes, while
b
) discouraging the use of ‘sin’ and luxury goods (tobacco, luxury cars), generating extra revenue via a 40% tax. (
Economic Times
)
🇮🇱
ISRAEL
-
What nukes?
New satellite imagery suggests Israel is building a new structure at the Negev facility widely believed to house its nuclear weapons program. Word is it could be a new reactor or an assembly facility. (
SCMP
)
Comment
: While Israel has never officially acknowledged its nukes, it’s an open secret it has ~90 warheads as a presumed insurance policy against a hostile region.
🇹🇯
TAJIKISTAN
-
Love thy neighbour.
Tajik and Taliban border guards have exchanged fire, reportedly leaving one dead. Although the immediate trigger isn’t clear, tensions have escalated since a China-owned gold operation started on the Afghan side of their shared Panj River three years ago. (
Times of Central Asia
)
🇫🇷
FRANCE
-
Better safe than sorry.
A leaked letter suggests the French government has told its hospitals to prepare for a potential “
military engagement”
by next year, involving up to 50,000 men hospitalised over a period of 10 to 180 days. Health Minister Catherine Vautrin later explained it’s about “
anticipating crises
”. (
Independent
)
🇻🇳
VIETNAM
-
Anotha’ one.
China wasn’t the only power hosting a big parade this week: a day earlier, Vietnam held its biggest-yet celebrations to mark the 80th anniversary of its independence from France, releasing 14,000 prisoners to mark the occasion. (
AA
)
🇯🇲
JAMAICA
-
To the polls.
Jamaicans have re-elected Labour’s Andrew Holness to a rare third term as prime minister, rewarding him for this year’s historic drop in violent crime, though the close result reflects concerns around corruption and inequality. (
Guardian
)
Comment
: Another incumbent in the region, Guyana’s Irfaan Ali, has also claimed victory this week, pledging to continue developing the country’s vast oil reserves.
🇲🇦
MOROCCO
-
To court.
Morocco will apparently set up small legal courts inside football stadiums to deal with minor offences during the 2030 World Cup, co-hosted alongside Spain and Portugal. (
Reuters
)
Extra Intrigue
Meanwhile, in other worlds
Fashion
: China’s fast fashion giant Shein has launched an investigation after someone used the
likeness of Luigi Mangione
(standing trial for the NYC murder of UnitedHealthcare CEO Brian Thompson) to market a shirt.
Music
:
Radiohead will return to the stage
this year in the British group’s first tour since 2018.
Society
: Organisers have cancelled a multi-million dollar luxury
polar cruise for 150 Russian elites
after the FBI arrested a Russian crypto-tycoon involved in the enterprise, over allegations he helped smuggle US tech to Russia.
Postage stamp of the day
Credits: Philmpex Stamps.
You think you’ve seen a postage stamp, but then Bhutan comes along in 1973 and issues one that’s also a fully playable record!
Yeah, you read that right. You could either peel the paper off and affix it to that postcard you promised your parents. Or you could pop it onto your vinyl player for a taste of Bhutanese folk songs.
Marvellous.
Today’s poll
How do you think China's military now compares to the US?
🪖 It's decades away
⌛ Just a few years off
💨 Already neck-and-neck
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think we're near peak oil?
🛢️
No way - the IEA is often wrong (64%)
☀️ Yep - solar growth is historic (33%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (2%)
Your two cents:
🛢️
Q.B.D:
“Growing energy demand (rising population, developing economies, data centres) is likely to require the full output of both fossil-fuel and renewable energy sources.”
☀️
J.G:
“Most of the world is turning to electrification. Peak Oil is going to come from the demand side and not the supply side. And soon.”
✍️
S.L:
“It depends on public political will. Many countries' societies need to start taking the climate crisis much more seriously for oil demand to actually flatten out by 2030.”