URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/what-s-xi-doing-in-moscow-eeced540f741d0c8
Title: 🌍 What's Xi doing in Moscow?

Today’s briefing:
— What’s Xi doing in Moscow?
— We have a pope (and owe you a drink)
— Uffff, so awkward
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. The crazy pace of news this week is a great time for me to remind you about Intrigue’s fantastic WhatsApp community.
The conversation has been going off over the last few days — we’ve benefitted from insightful, on-the-ground assessments of the situation in Kashmir, a top ten list of the best books on foreign affairs, and as of last night, an in depth discussion on whether the new Pope is a Cubs fan or a White Sox fan (a White Sox fan, we think).
There are some seriously impressive folks in our growing community and we think it’s a fun place to hang out and shoot the breeze.
If you want in, just grab your personal sharing link below and get five of your friends to subscribe to Intrigue. It’s that simple!
Today we’re stepping away from the front pages to focus on one of the most important relationships in the world…
David and Victo
Presidents Xi and Putin.
Quick update:
Pope Leo XIV
Habemus Papam!
It took the cardinals just 24 hours and 24 minutes to elect the first US pope (Robert Prevost is also a citizen of Peru, where he’s served for 31 years)
Seen as a moderate, he’s the same guy who just tweeted “
JD Vance is wrong
” after the VP’s comments on ‘ordo amoris’ (a medieval concept about prioritising love)
At 69, he will (if the boss above permits) be at the helm for a while
And yes, not sure why we offered Intriguers a drink if someone from the Americas ended up pope, but you’ve gotta admit, that’s a funny way to go bankrupt. On an unrelated note, anyone want to sponsor our next Intrigue happy hour?
Xi-Putin bromance
Vladimir Putin is hosting world leaders in Moscow for WWII victory celebrations today.
Why does this matter?
As Putin’s war continues to warp Russia’s economy and wreck a generation, he needs to
project strength and solidarity
for audiences at home and abroad, and
Today’s pageantry also helps Putin
link Russia’s sacred WWII struggle
against an actual Nazi invasion, with his ongoing invasion of Ukraine.
But there are a couple other signals on display.
One inadvertent signal is the fact that this annual military parade is now less than half its pre-war size, reflecting the degree to which all Putin’s chips really are now in Ukraine.
But
the bigger signal is up in the stands
: China’s Xi Jinping is one of 20 or so world leaders there today (like Brazil’s Lula, Egypt’s El-Sisi). They’ll each have their own reasons, whether seeking to
a)
bolster their domestic legitimacy by sitting with the big dogs, and/or
b)
projecting themselves abroad as real players on a multipolar stage.
But what really matters — and what might shape the next century — is
why Xi is there
:
Xi and Putin signed several
cooperation agreements
, though this is standard for a Xi visit (and details remain scant), but more importantly…
Xi’s own
op-ed
in a Russian paper said the
quiet bit out-loud
— “
We must leverage the certainty and resilience of our partnership of strategic coordination to jointly accelerate the shift toward a multipolar world.
”
Translation
: he now sees a historic opportunity (with Russia) to push harder and more quickly towards a post-US-led world.
So turning up to today’s parade is a way to signal this not only to Putin and others hoping to curb US influence, but also to the US itself, just as the two start talks in Switzerland.
Intrigue’s Take
This all leaves us pondering
the limits of this ‘no limits’
Russia-China partnership:
While Xi has loaned Putin some
industrial
capacity, he’s not sending missiles
While weak
oil
prices sap Putin’s war machine, Xi is still stiffing him on gas, and
We also question the degree to which Xi truly wants to
lead
a gaggle of pariahs (like Kim, Putin, or Khamenei) reminiscent of that tavern scene from
Star Wars
.
But meanwhile, it’s also worth reflecting on the fact that a
relative
decline in US influence is inevitable as more economies crack the code for growth (a good thing). In fact, the US baked that into
our world’s post-WWII order
when it established the kinds of rules and institutions that
should
protect US interests long after others have risen near the top.
Rather, the tension here is not so much about who’s rising, but
how:
not by taking their seat at the table, but by upending it with (say) invasions of Ukraine. And that’s what the world is also asking about Trump 2.0: what role does the US now want at this table?
Sound even smarter:
President Trump just
called
again on Russia to accept an unconditional 30-day ceasefire.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES - Trump and Starmer unveil mini trade pact.
While the deal lowers average British tariffs on US goods from 5.1% to 1.8%, Trump’s 10% tariffs continue. The US will, however, cut US duties on British cars and steel, and the two are moderately opening up to more farm products. (
Politico
)
Comment:
It’s interesting to see the US sticking with the 10% tariffs, presumably dangling that carrot for something bigger, like the UK ditching its digital taxes.
🇵🇰
PAKISTAN - India and Pakistan still trading fire.
India says it’s repelled drone attacks on three bases (Pakistan denies any role), while shelling has continued along their de-facto Kashmir border. (
Independent
)
Comment
: Yesterday we flagged the US mediation role in defusing past spats. This time around? JD Vance just told Fox News it’s “fundamentally none of our business”.
🇨🇳
CHINA - Exports show unexpected resilience.
China’s global export values jumped a surprising 8.1% in April, despite a tariff-induced 18% drop in exports to the US. (
Guardian
)
Comment
: Whether due to transhipment through third countries or deliveries on pre-tariff contracts, it’ll give China confidence for US talks in Switzerland this weekend.
🇹🇷
TURKEY - X blocks arrested Istanbul mayor’s account.
Following a court order, Elon Musk-owned
X
has blocked Ekrem İmamoğlu’s account, weeks after Turkish authorities arrested the popular Istanbul mayor on charges that look a lot like an attempt to knee-cap a rival to the president. (
X
)
Comment
: Things have clearly changed since Musk’s big free speech spat with Brazil. Friends in Turkey tell us this feels like a slap in the face after weeks of protests.
🇬🇧
UNITED KINGDOM
- British police foil Israel embassy attack.
They’ve arrested five Iranian nationals over alleged plans to attack Israel’s embassy in London. UK authorities haven’t said whether there’s any alleged involvement from Tehran, though Iran’s foreign minister has issued a pre-emptive denial. (
BBC
)
🇵🇦
PANAMA - US security pact to stay despite protests.
The US-friendly president (José Raúl Mulino) is shrugging off recent local protests, insisting the deal won’t lead to US bases in Panama. (
AP
)
🇳🇬
NIGERIA - Abuja pays off $3.4B IMF loan.
Nigeria is now off the list of those owing the IMF any Covid debt. (
Bloomberg
$)
Comment
: President Tinubu might claim vindication, as it was his polarising decision to free-float the naira that helped put Nigeria’s finances on a more sustainable track.
Extra Intrigue
Three stories we couldn’t shoehorn in this week 🗞️
Money:
Bill Gates has
announced he’s winding down
his foundation by 2045 (earlier than expected), to front-load and maximise the $75B fund’s impact.
Lifestyle:
WeightWatchers (of early 2000s infomercial fame) has
filed for bankruptcy
, blaming social media and new treatments like Ozempic.
Luxury:
After experimenting with local discounts, luxury brands are apparently keeping their China prices high in an effort to
preserve the air of exclusivity
.
From our friends
Read by decision-makers. Curated for changemakers.
Foreign Affairs delivers insightful, authoritative analysis from global leaders in policy, business, science, and technology. From Washington to Beijing, it's the trusted source for analysis that drives real-world decisions.
Subscribe to Foreign Affairs
today to get an insider look on today’s most important debates.
Artefact of the day
Credits: Sotheby’s.
Sotheby’s has paused an auction featuring sacred Buddha relics, to allow for talks between the Indian government and the sellers (descendants of a British colonial explorer who dug up the artefacts from holy burial grounds in 1898). Delhi’s culture ministry wants them repatriated, while the sellers had their eyes on a starting bid of $12.5M. Awkward!
Friday Quiz
Monday was World Portuguese Language Day!
How many Portuguese speakers are there in the world?
100 million
50 million
265 million
550 million
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
When was World Portuguese Language Day created?
1909
2019
2009
2024
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Who created World Portuguese Language Day?
UN General Assembly
World Bank
BRICS
UNESCO
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate