URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/what-s-bibi-doing-back-in-gaza-83af78b019436689
Title: 🌍 What's Bibi doing back in Gaza?

Today’s briefing:
— What’s Bibi doing back in Gaza?
— Are Pakistan and India now at war?
— World’s worst mountain
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. I recall one of the first meetings I had as a junior diplomat in Israel almost ten years ago. I met with a veteran analyst from a hawkish think tank, and was turfed out within half an hour without getting a word in sideways.
This analyst told me that there was very little else diplomats serving in the country needed to know, outside of what he was about to tell me. He went on to illustrate a scenario in which a future Israel-Hamas war would kick off via land, air, and water, and descend into a drawn out war of attrition.
In the end, he said, the only way to resolve the war would be for Israel to fully re-occupy Gaza. As we turn to
Israel and Gaza
in our top story today, I can’t help but wonder what this analyst is thinking about the (once again) escalating situation there today.
Quick update:
India-Pakistan conflict
Jets down as India pulls the trigger on its Kashmir retaliation
India has now hit sites across Pakistan-controlled turf in response to last month’s Kashmir terrorist attack (the two sides dispute what exactly India has hit)
But Pakistan now says it’s
downed
five Indian jets (Delhi reportedly cedes at least three have “
crashed
”), and the two neighbours are trading
artillery
along Kashmir
This is the ‘
miscalculation
’ phase we
flagged
, with nuclear foes now at arms, and Pakistan vowing a response
World leaders are calling for
de-escalation
, but it’s unclear how much Modi and Sharif are still listening at this point — folks on both sides are baying for blood
What’s Bibi doing back in Gaza?
After weeks of Israeli air strikes, ground raids, and blockades billed as pressure tactics to force Hamas to release the final 59 hostages, the Israeli security cabinet has unanimously approved a plan to expand back across Gaza. The details of this ‘
Gideon’s Chariots
’ directive remain fuzzy, but an Israeli official has told media it’ll include:
“
the capture of the Strip and
holding
the territories
”
“
moving
the Gazan population south for its defence
”
“
denying
Hamas the ability to distribute humanitarian supplies
”, and
“
powerful
attacks
against Hamas
”.
Other
reported details
have emerged via media outlets, including:
The
destruction
of all northern tunnels, and any structures deemed a threat
The
screening
of civilians moved southwards (to filter out Hamas members), and
A new Israeli-controlled
aid
delivery via private contractors (to prevent Hamas from diverting aid — it’s unclear if this would end Israel’s blockade since March).
So, what’s going on?
Here are the main theories…
A negotiation tactic?
One senior Israeli official is telling outlets this plan won’t be implemented until
after President Trump’s visit
to the Middle East next week, calling it a “
window of opportunity
” for Hamas to release the hostages and agree to a new ceasefire.
Relatedly, Netanyahu might also be hoping to
stoke Gazan unrest
against Hamas, building on recent rare anti-Hamas protests across the strip.
But having survived the onslaught so far, and having crushed any dissent since it seized power in 2007, it’s
hard to see why Hamas might change course
now. To the contrary, Hamas remarks suggest some of the group’s leaders see casualties as tools to:
Increase
global pressure
on — and delegitimise — Israel, plus
Mobilise
local support
through resistance and martyrdom narratives.
Whatever it is, against the backdrop of Israel warning of an open-ended re-occupation of Gaza, Hamas officials have now declared there’s "
no point in any negotiations
".
A military tactic?
Bibi argues the plan will
hasten the defeat of Hamas
, with this ‘clear and hold’ strategy stopping Hamas from regrouping like it did last time. And that, he says, will hasten the release of the remaining 59 hostages (Israeli intelligence now believes only half are alive).
But none of the hostage families are buying it; condemnation of the
humanitarian cost
continues; and Hamas’s big hostage release ceremonies (with military uniforms and arms) were a reminder of the difficulty of removing the group via military means alone.
So that’s led to claims this is nothing but…
A political tactic
This plan has emerged after months of continued Israeli protests and rising discontent towards Bibi’s government, so there’s an argument it could be:
A
distraction
from economic woes and the backlash over his judicial reforms
A
deflection
from criticism over the ceasefire’s collapse, and/or
A
protection
against coalition instability, by throwing red meat to his ultra-nationalist allies (parts of the plan echo their rhetoric).
Or yes… maybe this plan is
exactly what it says on the label
, and even a step towards what Bibi’s hardliners now openly seek: the permanent re-occupation of Gaza.
Intrigue’s Take
If Israel proceeds with this plan, it’s not only heading down a perilous path with the Palestinians, but also potentially foreclosing other paths to
a broader peace with its region
. Rising players like the Saudis are already conditioning any recognition of Israel on Palestinian statehood, and that position will get wider and deeper as these wounds fester.
Israel’s isolation then risks becoming America’s isolation, given how many of the world’s ascendant players (including most of the BRICS and beyond) increasingly align their Israel-Palestinian advocacy with
broader efforts to counter US influence
. And that’s all playing out as US public sympathy for Israel hits 25-year lows (particularly among younger voters).
Maybe it’s hubris after his recent successes against Hezbollah and beyond, but history might show that Bibi is now flying way too close to the sun.
Sound even smarter:
The Israeli military already holds around one-third of Gaza.
Most Israelis supported moving onto the second phase of the ceasefire.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
Cytonics
Invest Beyond the News Cycle
In a world where every week brings a new macro shock, it’s easy to lose sight of the long-term. But some problems—like joint pain, immobility, and cartilage loss—don’t care about inflation or the S&P.
Cytonics is developing a next-generation biologic therapy for osteoarthritis that targets the underlying disease process—not just the symptoms.
Our drug candidate, CYT-108, has completed Phase 1 testing and is backed by decades of molecular biology research.
And unlike typical biotech ventures, we didn’t raise from VCs or hedge funds. We opened the door to over 6,000 everyday investors through our Reg A+ offering.
This isn’t about timing the market. It’s about transforming medicine.
Secure your equity stake in the future of joint health
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇩🇪
GERMANY - Merz elected Chancellor after initial shock loss.
Hours after a routine parliamentary vote stunned the world by robbing conservative leader Friedrich Merz of Germany’s leadership, the Bundestag ended up electing him Chancellor in a second round. (
Euractiv
)
Comment:
Not great optics for Merz, suggesting there’s still dissent in the ranks just as he pledges to drive a new era of stability and strength for Germany and Europe.
🇨🇦
CANADA - Trump and Carney play it cool in first meeting.
After months of fiery rhetoric and tariffs between these two neighbours, trade partners, and allies, the first meeting between Trump and Canada’s newly-elected prime minister was actually pretty cordial. (
BBC
)
Comment:
Mark Carney is formidable — we remember his star power at G20 summits back in his central banker days. It’s interesting to now see his Trump strategy in action, blending flattery (calling him transformational), business (pitching Canada as America’s top client), and firmness (pushing back on the 51st state idea, though Trump still said “never say never”).
🇬🇧
UNITED KINGDOM - London and Delhi mint trade deal.
After three years of negotiations, the UK and India have now agreed a trade pact, slashing Indian tariffs on UK products in return for eased tax conditions on Indian expats in the UK. (
Guardian
)
Comment:
India is a massive and fast-growing market, but also a notoriously tough sparring partner. So this deal is a win for British exporters, but also for India, which often uses market access as leverage to get better conditions for its diaspora abroad: partly for economic reasons ($120B in remittances each year); and partly for demographic reasons (opportunities for its 10 million college graduates each year).
🇰🇬
KYRGYZSTAN - Bishkek recruits Binance founder as crypto advisor.
Changpeng Zhao, the Binance founder who resigned after pleading guilty to US money laundering charges, is now advising the Kyrgyz government on its efforts to start a crypto reserve and streamline bureaucracy via blockchain. (
Eurasianet
)
Comment
: Since his release from prison last year, Zhao has already advised others like Pakistan, Malaysia, and the UAE, who’ll have seen him as guilty of regulatory missteps rather than outright fraud. He remains popular in crypto communities, so hiring him is probably a cost-effective way to make a splash in a cut-throat sector.
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES - US, China trade officials to meet in Switzerland.
US Treasury Secretary Scott Bessent and US Trade Representative Jamieson Greer will now meet China’s top economic official (Vice-Premier He Lifeng) in Switzerland this weekend, though Bessent is saying it’s about de-escalation rather than a big trade deal. (
SCMP
$)
Comment
: After weeks of conflicting claims, we finally have confirmation that US-China talks are even starting. As to when they might deliver an off-ramp? Both sides are signalling they have the upper hand — that’s partly a negotiation strategy, but also partly because neither side has felt the full impact of this trade halt yet.
🇻🇪
VENEZUELA - US helps five opposition members flee.
The US secretary of state has announced that DC helped five opposition figures flee to US soil, after spending months hiding at Argentina’s embassy in Caracas. (
X
)
🇮🇱
ISRAEL
- Israeli spyware maker to pay Meta $170M in damages.
A US jury has ordered Israel’s NSO Group to pay WhatsApp damages over a 2019 hacking spree using NSO spyware. WhatsApp says it’s a vote of confidence in the app’s security, while NSO hasn’t ruled out appealing. (
TechCrunch
)
Extra Intrigue
The Intrigue jobs board
💼
International Trade Analyst @
Sidley Austin LLP
in Washington, D.C.
Data Analyst
@
Blackbird
in Sydney
Executive Director @
United Nations Population Fund
in NYC
Political Adviser @
ICRC
in Nairobi
Tourist attraction of the day
Pics shared by @Xiong via the ‘Little Red Book’ app
When trying to wow your friends with some sweet sweet travel pics, perception is key. Share the above image on the left, and folks’ll be amazed you rode a mystical white steed to reconnect with your inner peace while wandering the foothills of Japan’s Mount Fuji.
But share the one on the right? Your buddies might realise you’ve actually just visited China’s new fake Mount Fuji tourist attraction in northern Hebei province — a small hill painted white on top (visit during the holidays, and you might see it spew pink smoke!).
China’s social media is awash with visitors bemused to find that, a little like
The Truman Show
, there’s even a small door and staircase ‘round the back. Tickets cost $13.
Today’s poll
Do you think India and Pakistan are barrelling towards an all out war?
💥 Yes, it's already begun
🛡️ No, both sides know the stakes
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
What do you think has the most influence on the papal election?
🌍 Regional dynamics (8%)
🇻🇦
Internal dynamics (78%)
🕊️ Religious considerations (12%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (1%)
Your two cents:
🇻🇦
N.D:
“As much as I want to click 'Religious considerations,' centuries of Church history highlight the primacy of politics.”
🕊️
D.R:
“The Pope is elected to serve God first, people second. Voting certainly follows this pattern.”
🌍
E.K.M:
“A major focus of Francis' papacy was including voices from all over the world, and I think we're going to see that in action.”
✍️
S.M:
“If you want to make God laugh, tell Him about your plans.”