URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/what-these-netizens-reveal-about-china
Title: 🌍 What these netizens reveal about China

Today’s briefing:
— What these netizens reveal about China
— A Coke shortage where?!
— Sad people in nice forests
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. This Friday edition of Intrigue is for those currently “
China-maxxing
” (did I use that expression correctly, Gen Z?), or just interested in learning more about what’s happening behind that Great Firewall of China. We dive into
three stories that are trending from the Chinese internet
, including a phenomenal anti-Myers-Briggs personality quiz (please send us your results!) trending among the Gen Z, a seriously mid soccer team from Suzhou, and some antique vases.
Speaking of the Chinese internet: for those who want some entertaining weekend reading, I highly recommend checking out
The Wall Dancers
by Yi-Ling Liu. It explores how Chinese citizens have navigated freedom and control on their regulated internet over the past three decades, and provides some truly insightful and diverse stories that most of us on the other side of that firewall have missed.
Let’s dive right in.
PS
— Welcome to our new subscribers from last night’s
2Way episode
!
Number of the day
680 yuan
(~$100)
That’s the spot electricity price (MWh) now hitting China’s gas-heavy Guangdong manufacturing heartland, ~double the March average. China’s strategic petroleum reserves have insulated it from the Hormuz
oil
crunch, but gas is trickier to stockpile.
Silly Big Geopolitics Newsletter.
Spend too much time monitoring the situation, and you soon forget about normal life.
So we thought it’d be both fun and insightful to explore
three things now trending
behind China’s Great Firewall, starting with…
The sassy personality test
Mmmkay, but why are you writing about personality tests?
That’s exactly what
we
thought when we spotted an
article
in the Communist Party’s own Global Times tabloid about something called the ‘
Silly Big Personality Test
’ now going viral among China’s Gen-Z.
First, the what
: it’s a quirky, sarcastic take on the ubiquitous Myers-Briggs Type Indicator coined by a mother-daughter duo back in the 1940s: these days, casually stirring creamer  while labelling Barry from accounts a ‘toxic INTJ’ is peak corporate living.
But China’s viral version doesn’t take itself seriously, asking users unhinged questions (
your reaction if someone says they have diarrhoea?
) that produce amusingly absurd personality types like ‘Poor’, ‘Sexy’, ‘Drunk’, and the quintessential ‘Shit’.
Second, the why
: the semi-anonymous creator says she used AI to build a light-hearted roast to convince her buddy to tone down the booze, but it blew up bigly.
And
that’s
the why we find intriguing: in a country with ~16.9% youth unemployment, where so much hinges on
one brutal Gaokao
college entrance exam, it’s easy to see how dunking on the very idea of all-knowing tests might resonate with a frustrated Gen Z.
And why would
The Global Times
report this? Propagandists often jump on trends to seem relevant, but this piece frames it all positively as a fun way to cope with pressure and feel belonging — it’s a subtle nod to real stresses but without criticising the system, positioning the Party as
wise guardians
: don’t let tests or trends define you, kids.
The amateur football league
Mmmkay, but why are you writing about Friday night football?
First, the what
: 13 cities from eastern China’s Jiangsu province are now competing in the second-ever Su Super League. And what it lacks in soccer professionals, it makes up for in raw spirit: the
opening ceremony
featured a pop-star, dancing robots, and 40 go-karts?!
It’s all generating incredible buzz, attracting more spectators than China’s entire national league, and even giant corporate sponsors like Coca-Cola and Adidas.
Second, the why
: last year’s two billion views were the result of city rivalries (salted duck vs honey peach!), authentic vibes (delivery guy vs fishmonger!), and endless memeable moments — and the virality’s only grown this year, like when a giant inflatable dinosaur mascot ended up resembling a soy braised duck, or when a famous actor appeared in
full armour
, because why not.
But…
why?
We see a timely reminder of the strong local
identities
that exist beyond the Party’s unity rhetoric, and the universal human craving for
authenticity
and
community
.
And while the phenomenon appears to have
caught the Party by surprise
, state outlets are obviously now
hype-manning
given the way this all aligns with President Xi’s priorities around domestic consumption and cultural confidence. There’s also a bit of finger-wagging at other provinces — why can’t you be more like Jiangsu!
Hugo’s day has come
The Indiana Jones model of archaeology was still the norm
relatively
recently. Cool statue? Yoink. Thousand-year-old vase? Double yoink.
Mmmkay, but why are you writing about old vases?
First, the what
: France just unanimously passed a bill to simplify the return of looted artefacts, and the debate featured lawmaker Jérémie Patrier-Leitus quoting
Victor Hugo
’s 1861 condemnation of the sacking of Beijing’s Old Summer Palace: “
One day will come when France, once freed and cleansed, will return this plunder to looted China.
”
And sure enough, that footage and the Hugo quote has now gone viral, with China’s netizens often using the hashtag 雨果写的文字成真了 (“
Hugo’s words came true
”).
Second, the why
: it all ties neatly into China’s '
century of humiliation
’ (1839-1949) when foreign powers subdued and sectioned the Middle Kingdom. That era is now a key slice of the Party’s narrative as restoring China’s rightful place on the podium, so it’s no surprise this news has gone viral amid feelings of nationalism, redemption, and curiosity.
Intrigue’s Take
We’re mindful not to make sweeping generalisations of generations let alone entire complex societies like China’s, but… allow us a moment to zoom out and reflect?
First
, all three viral trends expose
the limits of top-down control
: cut all the ribbons and launch all the roadmaps you want, but what actually thrives might end up being some sassy personality test, an amateur city derby, or a lawmaker’s speech in Paris.
Second
, it’s a reminder that while young folks might be exhausted from modern life (spawning an entire
rùn
culture of quiet quitting), there’s a reminder here that if you give young folks something
real and local
to care about, they’ll show up in droves.
And
third
, maybe
the Party is more agile
than we assume — in each example you can see Beijing’s mouthpieces riding and steering that viral energy towards approved messages, whether it’s wellbeing, consumption, or national pride.
So summing it all up, maybe these three viral trends actually represent a pretty neat emotion cycle: self-deprecation → tribal belonging → national vindication.
Today’s briefing is presented by…
Become An AI Expert In Just 5 Minutes
If you’re a decision maker at your company, you need to be on the bleeding edge of, well, everything. But before you go signing up for seminars, conferences, lunch ‘n learns, and all that jazz, just know there’s a far better (and simpler) way:
Subscribing to The Deep View.
This daily newsletter condenses everything you need to know about the
latest and greatest AI developments
into a 5-minute read. Squeeze it into your morning coffee break and before you know it, you’ll be an expert too.
Subscribe right here
. It’s totally free, wildly informative, and trusted by 600,000+ readers at Google, Meta, Microsoft, and beyond.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES — List of punishments.
An internal Pentagon email suggests the US is mulling options to punish allies for not helping on Iran, including suspending Spain from NATO and reviewing DC’s position on UK-run Falklands (which Argentina claims). (
Reuters
)
Comment
: It’s unclear if unilateral NATO suspension is even possible. Rather, by actively briefing all this out to a journalist (at the non-serious level of an email), it looks like classic Trump-era pressure and signalling for allies to get in line (or else).
🇱🇧
LEBANON — Ceasefire extended.
President Trump has announced a three-week extension to the fragile Israel-Lebanon ceasefire, despite Hezbollah and Israel trading breach allegations, and Lebanon accusing Israel of war crimes after an airstrike killed a reporter. (
BBC
)
🇰🇵
NORTH KOREA — Exiting hermit mode.
Russia and North Korea have celebrated the joining of their first cross-border road bridge in a project they say will boost trade when it opens this summer. (
CNA
)
Comment:
Tough to verify, but this is likely also about solidifying the supply lines for North Korean arms and troops backing Putin’s invasion of Ukraine.
🇬🇧
UNITED KINGDOM — Foreign investors.
London’s BAE Systems will start building naval frigates for Norway before completing the Royal Navy’s own eight-ship order, after the UK reassigned production slots under a $13.5B export deal. (
BBC
)
Comment
: Prioritising Norway’s cash over the Royal Navy’s own readiness is an awkward headline, though you could spin it as a win-win: help accelerate the deterrence for a treaty ally bordering Russia, while repairing the UK’s own budget.
🇳🇱
NETHERLANDS
— Dirty arms.
An independence movement for Indonesia’s West Papua province has urged former colonial power the Netherlands to halt arms sales to Jakarta, arguing it uses Dutch arms in operations that harm West Papuan civilians. No response from Jakarta, which generally refuses to acknowledge what it sees as an illegal separatist movement. (
RNZ
)
🇲🇽
MEXICO — Bienvenido.
President Sheinbaum has tapped Mexico’s dual development bank chief (Roberto Lazzeri) as her new ambassador to the US. (
Reuters
)
Comment
: This looks to us like a signal Sheinbaum wants her top envoy to focus on critical economic issues like tariffs, supply chains, and the USMCA renegotiation. Senate approval will be a formality before Lazzeri lands in DC around May or June.
🇱🇸
LESOTHO — Greater market share.
King Letsie III and South Africa’s Ramaphosa have inaugurated a new bridge in Lesotho that paves the way for a massive new dam to nearly double water exports to South Africa, parts of which rely on Lesotho for drinking water. (
Africa News
)
Comment
: These kinds of cross-border dependencies are rapidly going out of style, for reasons the two neighbours know well: Lesotho now wants more for its water, and modern Africa’s ‘first water war’ actually featured South Africa deploying troops to secure Lesotho’s water infrastructure amid the kingdom’s 1998 post-election riots.
Extra Intrigue
Three trade facts to ponder over the weekend
🔬
🥃
American whiskey distillers, finding it tough to reach traditional markets like Canada and Europe amid the trade war, are looking to sell more to
Singapore
.
🥤
Diet Coke is now in
shortage across India
as the Hormuz blockade curbs the supply of aluminium, which makes the cans.
🍅
And US tomato prices just
spiked 15% in a month
amid Mexico’s retaliatory tariffs, meaning American consumers might pay a little more for that crisp BLT.
Rebrand of the day
Credits: Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Finland
After winning World’s Happiest Country nine years in a row, the Finns finally took a hint and made a whole foreign ministry-led tourist strategy of it.
Dubbed
“
Making happiness happen
”,
Helsinki is trying to frame its happy reputation as intentional and even exportable, rather than just “
we have forests and saunas
”. It gives less “
sad people in nice woods
”, and more “
we engineered this happiness like a Nokia 3310
”.
Finland’s secret? They say it’s all about design: a society that values trust and freedom.
Friday Quiz
Test your knowledge of this week’s Intrigue!
Russia is halting oil supplies to...
Hungary
Azerbaijan
Germany
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
The Dominican Republic will resume flights with...
Haiti
Brazil
Canada
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
DC received a surprise currency swap request from...
Iraq
Bahrain
UAE
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate