URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/need-know-g20
Title: 🌍 What you need to know about the G20

Today’s newsletter supported by:
Hi there {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
The Pope likes pizza, King Charles likes plums, and thanks to a
chance encounter
by our very own Ethan, we can now reveal that the US Secretary of Transportation enjoys Chipotle bowls with white rice, fajitas, pinto beans, chicken, medium green, cheese and lettuce. Dear Intriguer, we will not rest until we’ve revealed
every
cabinet member’s Chipotle order. You deserve nothing less.
Today’s briefing is a 5 min read:
🌏 India wraps up
the G20
.
🚢
Rising sea levels put
ports
at risk.
➕
Plus:
Quite the zoom, how the papers are covering rising oil prices, and why someone tried to cross the Atlantic in a giant hamster wheel.
⏱️ Around the world in sixty seconds
🇰🇵
North Korea
:
Pyongyang unveiled a new
nuclear assault submarine
last week, reportedly capable of carrying 10 nuclear missiles. Over the border, South Korea’s military chiefs said the new sub appears “
not capable of normal operation
”
.
🇦🇹
Austria
: The EU has rebuked its own envoy in Austria, Martin Selmayr, for saying Austria was
sending “blood money”
by continuing to buy Russian gas. Austria’s foreign ministry has also condemned Selamyr’s remarks.
🇦🇺
Australia
: The Philippines and Australia
elevated their ties
to a strategic partnership on Friday (8 September) and have agreed to conduct joint patrols in the South China Sea. Separately, the US has also upgraded its ties with Indonesia and Vietnam in recent days.
🇬🇹
Guatemala
: A court sentenced former president Otto Pérez Molina to
eight years in prison
on corruption charges last week. Pérez (72) has been in jail since the day after he resigned in 2015.
🇲🇦
Morocco
:
A
6.8 magnitude earthquake
killed more than 2,100 people after it hit late on Friday night. Rabat hasn’t yet issued an international appeal, but is reportedly receiving specific assistance from Spain, Qatar, Britain and the UAE.
🌏 G20 | Geopolitics
What you need to know about the G20
India's two-day
summit of G20 leaders
wrapped up yesterday (Sunday).
What's the G20?
It's a group of 20 ‘major’ economies, but not the 20 largest: e.g., it includes both South Africa (ranked #39) and Argentina (#23).
The list of members
was developed in the 1990s by mid-ranking US official Timothy Geithner (who later became US treasury secretary). He wanted a mix of key advanced and emerging economies, to better coordinate policy.
So the G20 remained a niche finance bloc until 2008, when the US upgraded it to an annual summit of leaders during the global financial crisis (GFC).
What happened this weekend in India?
To the surprise of many, G20 members (including Russia) managed to agree on a
declaration
, including:
🏦
Calling (in broad terms) for bigger and better multilateral banks
🌍 Welcoming the African Union as a G20 member (it was already attending every summit as an invitee), and
🇺🇦
Highlighting the suffering from the "
war in Ukraine
" (the text lists Russia as a source of grain, but not as the source of the invasion…)
The no-show by China’s leader was also intriguing. There were likely
various factors
at play, but China’s spoiler role at the summit suggests sheer rivalry was a key consideration. E.g., China tried (unsuccessfully) to:
📖
Cut a
Sanskrit term
from the G20 declaration, likely seeing India’s phrase (meaning “
the world is one family
”) as rivalling China’s own vision for “a
community of shared future for mankind
”, and
🙅
It also
tried
to oppose any mention of the US hosting in 2026.
Intrigue's take:
In diplomacy, there's often a trade-off between legitimacy and effectiveness: adding another voice brings legitimacy (representing more people), but it cuts effectiveness (there are more competing interests).
The G20 was supposed to be the sweet spot
: with a manageable 20 voices, yet covering 85% of the world's GDP and two thirds of its population.
But with the GFC in the rear-view
, the G20 became a solution in search of a problem, expanding its agenda in search of purpose: its declaration this year is
15,000 words long
(quadruple the 2008 statement)
.
Like all international bodies, the G20 is under pressure. And by most accounts, India was a solid host. But the big picture is the same: the G20 seems adrift, made worse by big power rivalry.
Also worth noting:
The G20’s final text on Ukraine
reportedly
involved "
over 200 hours of non-stop negotiations, 300 bilateral meetings (and) 15 drafts
".
G20 members also made announcements in the margins, including a US-led
trade corridor
from India to Europe through the Middle East; and an
India-led pact
on biofuels. Neither involved China.
Brazil will host the G20 next year, followed by South Africa in 2025 and the US in 2026.
📰
How newspapers covered…
Rising oil prices
Dubai, UAE
“Oil jumps as Saudi Arabia and Russia extend supply cuts to end-2023”
Atlanta, US
“Oil could hit $107 due to Saudi Arabia’s and Russia’s supply cuts, Goldman Sachs warns”
London, UK
“G7 shelves regular Russian oil cap reviews as prices soar, sources say”
Today’s newsletter is supported by: Nice News
Wake up happy.
At International Intrigue, we know that news isn't only violence and crisis. That's why we love Nice News, an email digest that filters through 100+ sources each day to send you the most uplifting news stories.
Stay both informed and inspired with their 3-minute daily email. Join for free and begin to wake up a little bit happier.
Join with one click.
🚢
Global | Shipping
Are ports going under?
A new
study
(
💲
) commissioned by Lloyd’s Register, a shipping services group, says a third of the world’s 3,800 ports are
“located in a tropical band vulnerable to the most powerful effects of climate change".
Some of the at-risk ports
include
:
🇨🇳
Shanghai (
43.19 million containers
moved in 2022)
🇺🇸
Houston (
3.9 million containers
), and
🇲🇽
Lazaro Cardenas in Mexico (
1.7 million containers
).
The report says a 40cm sea rise could render some ports unusable by 2050.
What to do?
The study calls for more investment in resilience, including flood defence systems like the one built along the Thames in the 1970s-80s.
Intrigue’s take:
Bit by bit, the global economy is adapting to what it sees over the horizon. The shipping sector’s International Maritime Organization just
adopted
a revised net-zero emissions target of around 2050.
But this Lloyd’s Register report suggests cutting emissions in the sector ain’t enough on its own; more ports may need bigger floodwalls, sooner.
Also worth noting:
The maritime sector accounts for around
3% of global emissions
.
➕
Extra Intrigue
Your weekly roundup of the world’s quirkier headlines:
Two have been detained for
demolishing a portion of the Great Wall of China
to dig a shortcut.
A presidential candidate in Taiwan is proposing
to give out dogs to expecting parents
to boost birth rates.
Police in the UK have responded to a report of
a ritualistic mass murder
, only to find it was a yoga class.
A Florida man was detained after attempting to cross the Atlantic on a
human-powered hamster wheel
.
And a woman in China reportedly held
16 jobs at once
without ever showing up, instead auctioning off each gig to the highest bidder.
🗳️ Poll time!
What do you think is the most important skill for a diplomat?
📢 Communication skills
🔍 Attention to detail
☮️ Conflict resolution
🎨 Creativity
🏆 Leadership
🧑 Advocacy
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
📸
Photo of the day
Credits: Mark Bret
Spot anything noteworthy about this photo? That’s the French Alps in the distance, captured from Pic de Finestrelles on the Spanish-French border, an incredible 443km away. The pic holds the
world record
for the longest ever photographed line of sight. Pretty, pretty, pretty good.
Thursday’s poll:
What festivity are you most looking forward to this northern fall / southern spring?
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️
👻
Halloween (27%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🍽 Thanksgiving (57%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🕍
Yom Kippur (2%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🪔
Diwali  (6%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🎉
National independence day of... (write in!)  (2%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!) (6%)
Your two cents
:
✍️
K.A
: ”Pay day!”
Honourable mentions:
Día de los Muertos (
🇲🇽
), Truth and Reconciliation Day (
🇨🇦
), National Braai Day (
🇿🇦
), Oktoberfest (
🇩🇪
), and Mid-Autumn Festival (🌏), plus the national days of Turkey (
🇹🇷
), Chile (
🇨🇱
), Mexico (
🇲🇽
), and Nigeria (
🇳🇬
).