URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/what-the-markets-just-told-usc32612b5f4840c14
Title: 🌍 What the markets just told us

Today’s briefing:
— What the markets just revealed
— A world leader under house arrest?
— This government is sponsoring your next binge
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Somehow it’s already August, and 2025 has simultaneously felt like the longest and shortest year yet.
While some of us are lapping up the endless Euro summer content that continues to trickle through online, others are already prepping their flannel shirts and licking their lips for that first sip of pumpkin spice latte for fall.
In geopolitics, it’s the time when folks quietly prep/panic for the September high-level meets like UNGA, and take stock of
the market’s performance
in the first half of the year. We’ll take you through some highlights of that in today’s briefing.
Number of the day
16,000
That’s how many hectares France’s ongoing wildfire has now burnt, its biggest since 1949.
Mid-year market check-in
It’s early August, aka earnings season, aka that time when the massive corporations running our military, insurance, and meme machines offer a sneak peek at Q2 earnings.
So, what’s the big end of town telling us six months into the year?
“In the United States, the most consequential country in the West, it is the culture that enables companies like ours to come into existence—and excel. It must be protected.”
— Alexander Karp, CEO,
Palantir
As our spooked world races to re-arm,
defence primes
are clearly poised to
profit
help: players like Lockheed and Raytheon (now going full KFC with its ‘RTX’ rebrand)
won
billions in contracts on a single sunny day in July, selling hit products like the F-35 jet.
But a whole
new generation of start-ups
like Anduril, Helsing, and Shield AI can now notch up serious valuations on a bet they can bring Silicon Valley’s disruptive spirit to the Beltway. Palantir alone just signed a $10B contract pumping the US Army full of AI.
There’s a running joke that nobody knows what Palantir actually does, but whatever it does, the markets are loving it: the Denver-based firm has doubled its valuation this year.
And Karp, Palantir’s curly-haired chief, doesn’t just issue bold powerpoints pledging to, you know, increase revenues and lower costs. Rather, like a Larry Fink or a Jamie Dimon, he likes to weigh in on the
big, philosophical, and geopolitical questions
of our age.
In his latest update, for example, Karp argues,
“the United States is not… a soft compromise and amalgam of global values and tastes.”
Rather, he says the US has always thrived by maintaining a
strong, distinct identity
in the face of competition. Implicit (and occasionally explicit) in his message is a fear this identity might be fading.
“We’ve had significant inflation in our international markets, particularly in Europe… primarily it’s a supply issue.”
— Chris Kemczynski,
CEO,
McDonald’s
We found the McDonald’s update intriguing for two reasons. Okay three if you include that we love a good Quarter Pounder® with Cheese
™
as much as the next ex-diplomat
©
.
But
first
, it’s interesting for what it says about
US households
, particularly because the company’s whole vibe is to stay accessible for everyone, always. And yep, the CEO says he’s noticed lower-income folks are visiting less, despite new items to offset
inflation
(a challenge he’s highlighted since 2020). Other income brackets are now spending
more
.
But
second
, you know what Kemczynski
didn’t
flag this week?
Anti-US sentiment
. It’s hard to think of a brand more closely linked to ‘Murica. That’s why, just in Q1, he was flagging big upticks in anti-US sentiment across Europe and Canada.
Now in Q2? Not even a mention. For Q1 he already flagged the inoculating effects of decades of
localisation
(you can get a McAloo Tikki in India, for example). So one challenge (sentiment) now seems more manageable than the other (macro conditions).
“And so we're going to be doing — we're doing more in this country, and that's on top of having roughly 19 billion chips coming out of the U.S. now, and we will do more.”
— Tim Cook, CEO, Apple
Speech experts in the intelligence community often scrutinise world leader footage for any hints of stress. And maybe they’d flag the kind of minor word-jumble above as reflecting
the pressure Apple’s chief is now feeling
, as he steers the world’s third-biggest company through a trade war between the world’s two-biggest economies, all while his firm cops criticism for its relatively slow and cautious approach to AI.
So it was interesting to hear Cook confirm that most iPhones sold in the US are now indeed made in India (rather than China), while iPhones sold everywhere else are mostly made in China. That’s a perfect example of how firms with global footprints and brands can
optimise their supply chains
to manage local political risk while still hitting targets.
But lest that logistical pirouette look too cute for any DC hawks, Cook backed up yesterday by
re-upping
his US investments, pledging another $100B for a total of $600B over four years, because given the stakes, why not go back and wring the towel a bit more.
Intrigue’s Take
Since we founded Intrigue (2020), geopolitics has gone from some niche line item for nerds, to the top risk getting flagged by CEOs. And today’s briefing offers hints into how some of the most effective leaders are responding.
First
, top CEOs aren’t just responding to
politics
, so much as actively hustling to shape it. And that means not just hitching a ride on Air Force One to the Gulf, but using every public utterance to strategically shape public debate, which leads us to…
Second
, top CEOs are now cosplaying as
philosophers-in-chief
, going beyond, you know, exhortations to lift revenue and cut costs, to instead weigh in on moral, strategic, and even civilizational questions. And they do that by framing their firms not just as economic actors, but as guardians of values. But to succeed in these first two…
Third
, top CEOs also ensure their global firms stay
nationally relevant
. That McAloo in India isn’t just a gimmick or even a line item, but an inoculation against populist pushback: we’re not globalist elites or American imperialists, but a locally-owned franchise living right next door.
Oh, and it’s not just burgers. Those defence primes and start-ups have similar (if less tasty) localisation strategies across the West, highlighting local talent, input, and ideas.
We continue to marvel that some of the best diplomacy right now is in the private sector.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
Cap Plastic Now.
Big Oil, Big Plastic, Big Emissions. Cap Plastic Production Now.
Today, 5.3% of global greenhouse gas emissions come from plastic production.
The production of petrochemicals and plastics is expected to be one of the largest growth drivers of future oil demand. Companies producing plastics are the same ones causing the climate crisis. They’re investing billions to double or triple production by 2050.
The Global Plastics Treaty is our last best chance to end plastic pollution and contain greenhouse gas emissions. Big Oil is lobbying to weaken the Global Plastics Treaty. Countries must stand firm and cap plastic production.
Learn more
.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
Big day.
The US president has announced he’s considering a 100% tariff on foreign-made semiconductors, with exemptions for firms that invest in the US. He also flagged he intends to meet Russia’s Vladimir Putin as early as next week to push for an end to the war. (
F24
)
🇮🇱
ISRAEL
-
Decision time.
Local outlets are reporting Israel’s security cabinet will tonight (Thursday) approve a plan to expand Israel’s Gaza operation to occupy the entire Strip, citing a Hamas refusal to release the hostages on acceptable terms. (
Axios
)
Comment:
Netanyahu is absorbing several risks here, including a) to the hostages (the IDF will enter areas where they’re believed to be held), b) local civilians already mired in a humanitarian crisis, c) Israel’s already-damaged standing, and d) Israel’s own security (the IDF chief of staff reportedly warned Netanyahu he’s walking into a trap). But President Trump reportedly won’t object to the Israeli proposal, with aides telling Axios the president was moved by the latest Hamas proof-of-life videos.
🇪🇸
SPAIN
-
Buy local.
Spain has scrapped plans to buy US-made F‑35 fighter jets, in favour of a European home-grown alternative (either the Eurofighter Typhoon or the
European Future Combat Air System
). (
Defence Industry Europe
)
Comment
: Spain’s single pivot kills several birds, whether maximising European capabilities, or curbing costs and US dependencies (the US had to quash rumours of an F-35 ‘kill switch’). But paired with Spain’s refusal to match NATO’s 5% spending target, it also sends a message of strategic autonomy to DC. Of course, it comes with costs, too: absent any F-35s, Spain’s navy loses its carrier-based strike capability once its Harriers retire from 2030.
🇧🇩
BANGLADESH
-
Save the date.
Voters will finally head to the polls in February for the first election since the fall of long-time leader Sheikh Hasina last year. The transitional government, led by Nobel laureate Muhammad Yunus, has long been under pressure to call a date. (
Daily Sabah
)
🇧🇷
BRAZIL
-
Stay home.
Former Brazilian president Jair Bolsonaro is now under house arrest after violating his court terms by using social media to address a rally. Prosecutors accuse him of attempting a 2023 coup, while he alleges the charges are political. (
Sky News
)
🇸🇩
SUDAN
-
Under siege.
The UN’s food agency has warned that a quarter million locals are facing starvation in Darfur’s city of el-Fasher, after a year-long siege by the notorious
Rapid Support Forces
paramilitary. It’s the Sudanese military’s last bastion in the region. (
BBC
)
Comment
: Almost two decades have passed since Clooney made that documentary trying to shine a light on Darfur, but the atrocities continue.
🇲🇳
MONGOLIA
-
Joint riches.
Officials from Oman are in Ulaanbaatar this week, offering to help establish a joint investment fund to finance unspecified programs and projects. (
KINA
)
Comment
: Why would cashed-up Oman and land-locked Mongolia do this? The Omanis are trying to diversify their oil and gas billions into new markets and sectors, while the Mongolians need capital to develop their vast mineral deposits.
Extra Intrigue
In other worlds…
Environment
: Canadian authorities have
blamed a bird that dropped a fish
on power lines for sparking a wildfire.
Architecture
: The Italian parliament has approved $16B to build the
world’s longest suspension bridge
linking Sicily to the mainland.
Art
: Auction house Sotheby’s has
returned a set of ancient Buddhist gemstones
to India after government pressure and lengthy negotiations.
From our sponsors
Let Summer Be Your Fresh Start With Therapy.
Therapy doesn’t have to wait for a crisis. Use the calm of summer to get curious, reflect, and talk to someone who gets it. BetterHelp makes it simple to start, with sessions by phone, video, or chat: no commute, no pressure.
Sessions are rated 4.9/5 from over 1.7 million reviews, and right now, you’ll get 25% off your first month.
Try Therapy Today
TV show of the day
Courtesy of Zero Day Cultural and Creative Co
Two back-to-back Intrigue TV recommendations this week?!
While yesterday’s tip was all about Korean espionage, today we’re onto cross-Strait tensions with Taiwan’s hot new war drama,
Zero Day Attack.
Set in 2028 after Taiwan’s next presidential elections, it tells the story of a mainland invasion, leveraging expert insights to feature plausible scenarios like disinformation, turncoats, and jamming.
Each of its ten episodes is directed by a different local film-maker, looking at the (speculative fiction) war from a different perspective. It’s already streaming in Taiwan and has a Japanese release from next week. As for the rest of us? Still TBC.
Anyway, the most intriguing part for us is this drama is partly funded by the Taiwanese government, in hopes of building public awareness and resilience. Others (including China’s defence ministry) are
criticising
the series as fearmongering.
Today’s poll
What do you think global CEOs should focus on most these days?
🧑‍🤝‍🧑 Customers
👷 Employees
💰 Investors
🏛️ Home governments
🌍 Foreign governments
✍️ Other (write us!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
How do you think this Trump-Modi standoff will play out?
✂️ India will curb its Russian oil purchases (26%)
🛢️
India will keep buying Russian oil (72%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (1%)
Your two cents:
🛢️
R.C.O:
“Exports to the US are only 1.8% of India's GDP, and Modi needs cheap fuel to satisfy his populist base.”
✂️
I.P:
“India may be willing to make the trade-off and curb its Russian oil purchases in the short term, but if it's playing the long game it will also make some sort of concession to Russia to keep open avenues for BRICS cooperation.”
✍️
A.S:
“Countries will be cautious on trade deals since they rely on the US, until they no longer need to. The short view of tariffs might be good today, but the long tail risks are going to be hard to repair.”