URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/reduced-size-template-60b5b5c5582f56a1
Title: 🌍 Where's Zhang Youxia?

Today’s briefing:
— What did Zhang Youxia do!?
— How to get arrested in Canada
— Diplomatic inception
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Sometimes to really grasp the cold, you don't need app screenshots (-29°F / -34°C in Fargo!) but just local paper headlines, like in Wausau and Green Bay where the winter is so wintery, they’ve had to cancel Winter Fest.
Anyway, whether you're freezing up north or schvitzing down south, enjoy our hot take on what — and I cannot stress this enough — just happened to
China’s top general
.
Number of the day
1.5 million
That’s how many artillery shells German defence giant Rheinmetall soon expects to produce each year, more than the entire US defence industry combined.
How far they fall
Zhang Youxia is gooooone.
China-watchers just spent the weekend hyperventilating into a paper bag after the rumours proved true:
Zhang Youxia
(plus yet another top general)
is under investigation.
Why such a big deal?
i)
Seniority
: second only to President Xi himself, Zhang
is
was China's top general, and even a member of the Party's top 24-member Politburo, and
ii)
Pedigree
: he's not just some square-jawed jock, but one of Xi’s fellow 'princelings' (their dads fought together), and a rare general with real combat experience (Zhang got wounded after Deng’s failed invasion of Vietnam).
So this stunning arrest suggests in Xi's China, nobody is untouchable.
But... what crime did Zhang commit?
There are three main theories:
☢️
Nuclear espionage?
The Wall Street Journal
claims
Zhang leaked nuclear secrets to the US! But there are reasons to
take this scoop with a quarry of salt
:
First
, it's so hard to believe any Western outlet has the
sources
you’d need for this scoop. Beijing has such relentless surveillance (particularly on core insiders)… who'd risk it?
And second
, a similar 'nuclear secrets' story did the rounds when Xi first nailed his foreign minister (Qin), but if that were true, Qin would now be jailed or worse, not grinning at a music festival or beavering away at a publishing house (seems Qin was having an affair).
So... there are real reasons to believe this ‘nuclear secrets’ story is less a juicy scoop, and more another Party line being fed to gullible, info-starved Westerners. Then maybe it’s...
💸
Just more corruption?
Not to suggest Western militaries are immune (google Fat Leonard), but
the PLA
's politicised, bureaucratised, and off-budget DNA all set it apart — that's famously how the CIA recruited generals: offer cash so PLA officers can bribe their way up the food chain.
So sure, the reality is someone that high, for that long, is some shade of corrupt. Throw in Zhang’s stint as
head of PLA procurement
(where the cash flows), plus the procurement wing's own recent arrests (including his own former underling / defence minister), and there are reasons to semi-believe all the state outlets now crying it's just corruption again.
But we say
semi
-believe because if the whole system is corrupt (Bloomberg is still banned in China after its 2012
reporting
on Xi's own ultra-wealthy family btw), the question then becomes why specifically purge
Zhang
, and why do so
now
, which brings us to...
🕵️
More political intrigue?
There's an entire cottage industry that pores over every Beijing statement for insights, and there are indeed clues that maybe Zhang's sin wasn’t just your run-of-the-mill, get-yourself-a-Swiss-chalet, send-your-daughter-to-Harvard corruption.
The PLA's own
Daily Editorial
, for example, has
added
spicy words like he "
undermined the CMC Chairman Responsibility System
", and "
endangered the Party's ruling foundation
", which
hint heavily at disloyalty
— the chair of the Central Military Commission is Xi.
But in China’s black box of elite politics, we can only guess if this was, say,
a
) taking bribes to promote underlings,
b
) forming networks of influence, and/or
c
) something bigger.
As for that ominous '
something bigger
', keep in mind the only ones now fanning wild coup rumours are the usual shady sources with a long history of wish-casting.
And one can only guess whether Zhang
actually
committed any of the above political sins at all, or whether it’s just Xi's own paranoia  — in an autocracy where power is law, Xi would hardly be China's first leader to purge allies before they become rivals.
So... which is it?
The truth
could
even be
a mega-mix
of both
ii)
(corruption) and
iii)
(intrigue), with
i)
(nuclear secrets) as the cover story or ‘ultimate charge’ to put him away for good.
But to be clear, nobody knows, and when the main theories are all actively shaped by either Party propaganda or anti-Party wish-casting, it makes sense to be cautious.
All we
do
know is that after an accelerating purge at the very top, Xi's CMC is now gutted beyond Xi and his loyal enforcer Zhang Shengmin — and how long until that investigator himself becomes the investigatee?
Intrigue’s Take
Before we get into two of the big implications (Taiwan and markets), it's worth a quick reflection on why autocracies so often use
such turgid, euphemistic language
to explain what tf is going on. And the answer is it's often a way to
a
) maintain the leader’s plausible deniability,
b
) preserve the Party’s illusion of unity, and
c
) fend off foreign eyes.
But of course, the result is the world's largest military and second-largest economy is run by a complete black box. If Xi has a heart attack (like his older brother), who takes charge? Nobody really knows, and that in itself is incredible.
As for this big Zhang news,
what (if anything) does it mean for Taiwan?
One theory is there's no way Xi could be preparing an actual invasion with his inner circle in such disarray. But with a black box, you
could
always conclude the exact opposite: eg, Emperor Wu famously replaced his aristocratic generals with a younger, hungrier cohort of loyalists before attacking the Xiongnu, and in turn massively growing China's footprint.
The other question is what (if anything) this means for
China's economy
. Beijing dropped this bombshell after markets closed, presumably to cushion the shock, but you can bet executives everywhere will take notice: China's vast economy might make you rich, or it might treat you like its own foreign minister, defence minister, and now top general.
Last Time the Market Was This Expensive, Investors Waited 14 Years to Break Even
In 1999, the S&P 500 peaked. Then it took 14 years to gradually recover by 2013.
Today? Goldman Sachs sounds crazy forecasting 3% returns for 2024 to 2034.
But we’re currently seeing the highest price for the S&P 500 compared to earnings since the dot-com boom.
So, maybe that’s why they’re not alone; Vanguard projects about 5%.
In fact, now just about everything seems priced near all time highs. Equities, gold, crypto, etc.
But billionaires have long diversified a slice of their portfolios with one asset class that is poised to rebound.
It’s post war and contemporary art.
Sounds crazy, but over 70,000 investors have followed suit since 2019—with
Masterworks
.
You can invest in shares of artworks featuring Banksy, Basquiat, Picasso, and more.
24 exits later, results speak for themselves: net annualized returns like 14.6%, 17.6%, and 17.8%.*
My subscribers can skip the waitlist.
Skip waitlist
*Investing involves risk.  Past performance is not indicative of future returns. Important Reg A disclosures:
masterworks.com/cd
.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
World watches Minnesota.
With a second ICE shooting in Minnesota generating global headlines, foreign capitals continue to avoid any direct comment, though China’s consulate already issued an advisory urging its nationals to carry valid ID and avoid protests. (
BBC
)
Comment:
We say ‘direct’ because China’s state outlets still make hay with this kind of US story: eg, mouthpiece China Daily has moved to link Minnesota to US actions abroad, arguing “the US government is now sliding into a Hobbesian state of nature at home and abroad, where force replaces law, and power overrides accountability.
”
🇮🇱
ISRAEL
-
Last remains.
Israel has launched what it’s calling a targeted operation in Gaza’s north to locate the remains of the last Israeli hostage. Israel says it’ll only reopen Gaza’s Rafah crossing with Egypt once the body is found. (
Reuters
)
🇺🇦
UKRAINE
-
No update.
President Zelensky has described last week’s trilateral talks with the US and Russia in Abu Dhabi as “
constructive
”, hinting at further talks as early as next week. (
CNN
)
🇮🇶
IRAQ
-
Comeback?
Former Iraqi prime minister Nouri al-Maliki is set for a political comeback after a majority-holding Shia bloc nominated him. His sectarianism made him a divisive figure first time around, and he’ll now have to grapple with increased US pressure to sever ties with (Shiite-majority) Iran. (
Al Jazeera
)
🇰🇵
NORTH KOREA
-
Step back?
The US envisions a “
more limited
” role in deterring North Korea, according to the Pentagon’s new
National Defense Strategy
. That line, plus no direct reference to Taiwan, has raised eyebrows, though the text otherwise largely reflects Trump’s emphasis on the Western Hemisphere, and allied burden-shifting. (
Korea Times
)
Comments
: It’s worth balancing the Strategy’s omission of the word “Taiwan” with the fact this Strategy still targets China’s Indo-Pacific dominance, not to mention the fact DC authorised a massive arms sale to Taiwan last month. Ie, maybe it’s less a change in strategy, and more a change in messaging to avoid another escalation.
🇮🇳
INDIA
-
Trade deal.
It’s trade deal season in Europe: finally endorsing the Mercosur deal after a quarter century of talks, Brussels is now on track to finalise a trade deal with India this week. The EU is hoping India will drop its high tariffs on cars and booze, while Delhi wants more European market access for its pharma and textiles. (
DW
)
Comments
: One of the counter-intuitive results of Trump’s trade war approach is how other capitals suddenly finalise deals everyone thought would be impossible. In a rush to hedge, those red lines start to seem a bit more orange.
🇺🇬
UGANDA
-
Post-election crackdown.
Uganda’s military chief has given opposition leader and music star Bobi Wine 48 hours to surrender, amid an ongoing post-election crackdown on President Museveni’s rivals. Wine is still in hiding at time of publication, though his wife just got hospitalised after an alleged government raid on their house. (
AfricaNews
)
Comments
: Non-fun fact: Uganda’s military chief is Museveni’s son and heir-apparent.
Extra Intrigue
🤣
Your weekly roundup of the world’s lighter news…
Scientists have discovered a mushroom that makes you
hallucinate tiny people
.
More than half of all cryptocurrencies ever launched have
failed
.
A Canadian man has confessed to
purposefully farting on police
.
Police have
arrested an Alaska art student
for eating a classmate’s AI art.
And Pizza Hut has
rebuked
Pakistan’s defence minister after he opened a fake Pizza Hut outlet in his home electorate.
Meme of the day
Diplomacy is NOT about power, fame, or fortune, dear Intriguer!
It’s about ENSURING the draft talking points are submitted by EOD Tuesday, to allow time for clearance through the director, assistant secretary, first assistant secretary, deputy secretary, associate secretary, and secretary. And then rewritten by the minister's young advisor. And then ignored by the minister on the day.
That’s one reason why Shakespeare himself couldn’t have described the mild tragedy of a diplomat going from red carpets, ribbon-cutting, and rarefied access abroad, to the classic burn-up on re-entry of cubicles, corridors, and cut-throat competition back home.
Today’s poll
What do you think was Zhang's main sin?
🤫 Leaked secrets
💼 Too corrupt
🧑‍🤝‍🧑 Formed a rival clique
😨 Nothing (Xi is just paranoid)
✍️ Other (write us!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Where do you think this Greenland affair will land?
✋
No change to Greenland's status (22%)
🧊
Cosmetic changes to placate Trump (58%)
↔️ A meaningful transfer of sovereignty (eg, over military bases) (19%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (1%)
Your two cents:
🧊
J.P:
“It doesn’t take much to impress Trump, and arguably, it takes even less to earn his ire.”
✋
A.M:
“All changes related to sovereignty needs to be approved by 5/6 of parliament or by referendum. Given the US popularity among Danes, little chance it happens.”
✍️
P.F.S:
“I have been telling my foreign clients who are blathering about WWIII or at least the collapse of NATO, that Trump genetically is not a bureaucrat or politician and he will not go to war over Greenland.”