URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/who-won-the-us-iran-war
Title: 🌍 Who won the US-Iran war?

Today’s briefing:
— Who won the US-Iran war?
— The International Seabed Authority is hiring
— The ultimate ambassadorial come-back
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. There’s a type of person who will slip Japanese writer Murakami into literally any conversation. Even a briefing on
the new US-Iran ceasefire
, for example, might be an opportunity for that kind of character to open with a reflection on the layered structure of a Murakami short story like
Cream
:
The story’s outer layer is about a young man receiving a mysterious invitation to a piano recital up in the mountains of Kobe, while…
The tale’s
inner
layer is about the eerie existential turn that comes when this traveller meets a cryptic elderly stranger en route.
The link? Maybe this US-Iran ceasefire is exactly as it seems on the outer layer: a big step back from the brink. Or maybe there’s some big existential twist on the next page. Or maybe, like so many Murakami stories, the real twist is there was never any recital at all — just a long, strange journey that leaves everyone wondering what the hell just happened.
Number of the day
25%
That’s how many Canadians think it’d be a good idea to join the European Union, with a further 58% open to exploring the possibility further.
Ceasefire.
Just 90 minutes before President Trump's 8pm Tuesday deadline expired, news broke of an immediate two-week ceasefire partly based on Iran's 10-point plan, which Trump argues is a "
workable basis on which to negotiate
" via talks that'll now continue in Pakistan.
There's plenty of mutual yelling around the details, but the
only four explicitly-and-mutually confirmed parts
of this ceasefire are now an immediate...
i
) Mutual
halt
to attacks
ii
) Re-
opening
of the Strait of Hormuz
iii
) Pause in related fighting (eg, Israel-
Hezbollah
), and
iv
) Two-week
talks
runway to iron out the rest.
So, it's really too early for any final declarations, but what the heck...
who won?
Let's take a quick tour de table, starting with...
Iran
State outlets are
declaring a historic victory
for three big reasons:
first
, the same theocratic regime still runs Iran, even after ~38 days of US-Israeli hits;
second
, that same regime is still sitting on ~440kg in highly-enriched
leverage
uranium; and
third
, what everyone long feared as this regime's
theoretical
Hormuz control is now real and effective.
A bonus
fourth
angle: the regime’s Farsi translations include a continued right to nuclear enrichment, something missing from the various English versions doing the rounds.
Now sure, scores of top regime figures are now meeting their Maker, a chunk of the regime’s military might now lies in ruins, the entire region now hates the regime more, while the US and Israel still rule Iran’s skies, but a younger Khamenei is still sitting on enough hard power to
a
) block Hormuz, and
b
) repress dissent. Does he need much more?
As for next steps, these talks now theoretically proceed on the basis of
Iran's own 10-point-plan
, which seems a win: capitals always fight to pen the first draft, because every edit thereafter comes at a price:
oh, you want us to delete that bit about Iran charging a $2M Hormuz fee? You don’t like sanctions relief? That’ll cost you, America.
Speaking of which, let's look at...
The United States
The White House is also
claiming
victory for three main reasons, emphasising the thousands of
targets
struck across Iran, the
deaths
of key regime figures, and the immediate
reopening
of Hormuz.
But even if you want to believe Trump's earlier messaging was mere
Art of the Deal
, this pause looks like a massive walk-back from his earlier
a
)
pledging
regime change, and
b
)
ruling out
any deal absent Iran's "
unconditional surrender
", let alone
c
) his vow that Iran’s beleaguered people could seize power in “
probably your only chance for generations.
”
In the meantime, this war has
cost
~15 US casualties, rare air defence and early-warning systems, key munition stockpiles, a dozen top removed generals, plus fraught ties with allies who
a
) weren't looped in,
b
) got called free-loaders and cowards for then staying out, and
c
) (particularly in the Gulf) will now doubt US protection — not just because of all their energy assets now ablaze, but because this two-week ceasefire
stipulates
their energy exports now require “
coordination
” with the same regime that just hit them hard for a month — they didn’t need Iran’s exit permission pre-war.
And speaking of allies...
Israel
We previously explored the big US-Israel goals gap here, but it's now on full display: Bibi's office has
voiced
careful support
for Trump's "
decision to suspend strikes against Iran for two weeks
", but the Israeli PM is rejecting any notion that those Iran-backed Hezbollah forces along Israel's border are part of the deal (aka #3 in the ceasefire terms above!).
To boot, Israel will see any deal that leaves Iran's regime in place — backing proxies like Hezbollah, Hamas, and the Houthis who’ve all called for Israel’s erasure — as an existential threat.
So that brings us back to our question above:
who won this war?
The truth is, with everyone still so far apart (nukes, missiles, proxies, Hormuz, and beyond), it’s hard to see this two-week stretch of talks ending with any plausible, longer-term deal at all.
So amid the negotiation tweets, leaks, and hot takes ahead, maybe keep an eye on something else we
flagged
last month: the USS Tripoli is already in-theatre, the equally-amphibious USS Boxer is days out, and the Bush carrier group (replacing the damaged Ford) is due to arrive before this two-week ceasefire expires.
And until those ships turn around, it’s a little bold to rule out the possibility this all just escalates again. In the meantime, a massive 15% single-day drop in oil prices (down to the low 90s) suggests markets sense this ceasefire might be for real.
Intrigue’s Take
Two things can be true at once: this brutal regime has no business ruling 90 million people let alone the world’s most critical energy artery; and yet maybe a full-frontal US-Israeli war not only wasn’t the answer, but might’ve even made things worse (eg Hormuz).
Still, observe the regime’s victory lap with caution: it now gets a ruined economy, a furious population, and a hostile neighbourhood, plus a freshly-demonstrated US-Israeli ability to hit its leaders and crown jewels at will. Don’t confuse survival with strength.
And for the US, a full war couldn’t deliver the knockout blow, but amid the possibility of some surprise move on Kharg or uranium, several factors will shape Trump’s thinking: he’ll want this
costly
and
unpopular
war in the rear-view before November’s mid-terms; but he’ll also be dissatisfied entering next month’s big Xi summit with Iran still claiming victory.
It all presents a tricky dilemma for the White House: another risky re-escalation, a messy draw, or perhaps a pivot in search of a quicker, easier win elsewhere: Cuba?
Sound even smarter:
Qatar’s foreign minister is now calling on Iran to compensate it for war damages — expect others to follow.
The transport minister of Oman (across the Hormuz) has flagged that, as an
UNCLOS
signatory, Oman treats the Strait as an international waterway free of the kinds of transit fees Iran has proposed. Note those charging transit fees (Egypt, Panama) are usually managing artificial canals within their own territory.
India’s embassy in Tehran just
urged
its citizens to leave as soon as possible, presumably seizing the opportunity of a ceasefire before any hostilities resume.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇭🇺
HUNGARY — Vance <3 Orbán.
Ahead of Sunday’s critical elections, US VP Vance has made a cameo to back the re-election of Hungary’s long-time strongman prime minister, Viktor Orbán. (
CNN
)
Comment
:
It’s an attempt to rally Orbán’s base and repay the favour for Orbán’s Trump endorsement, though it also risks
a
) looking desperate (Orbán’s numbers are grim),
b
) gifting the centre-right opposition a sovereignty angle (“we decide Hungary’s government, not DC”), and maybe even
c
) backfiring, a la Canada 2025.
🇮🇶
IRAQ — US journalist released.
An Iran-backed armed group has released US journalist Shelly Kittleson, days after assailants abducted her from a Baghdad street in broad daylight. (
NYT
$)
Comment
:
The group (Kataib Hezbollah) has framed it as a goodwill gesture tied to the Iran-friendly stance of Iraq’s prime minister, though there’s a chance he just traded her for jailed Kataib members. Either way, it’s all a reminder of the real operational freedom and leverage these groups still enjoy, even in downtown Baghdad.
🇨🇳
CHINA — Enemy of my enemy.
The leader of Taiwan’s more Beijing-friendly KMT opposition (Cheng Li-wun) is now in China on a
“journey for peace”
at President Xi’s invitation
.
The first such visit in a decade, it comes as Taiwan’s opposition-controlled parliament has stalled a proposed $40B special defense budget intended for US weapons purchases. (
PBS
)
Comment
: The key visit messages are in her two itinerary highlights: first was today’s visit to the mausoleum of Sun Yat-sen, with the revered ‘father of modern China’ a rare symbol of cross-Strait unity; the second is her possible meeting with Xi himself later this week, signalling Xi’s openness to dialogue with ‘the right’ representatives of Taiwan.
🇫🇮
FINLAND — Personae non gratae.
Using new laws, Finland has revoked refugee / protected status from 14 Iraqi and Russian nationals so far this year. Authorities haven’t specified which national security risks are at play (espionage, terrorism, serious crime), though all the affected individuals are now in pre-deportation appeals. (
Helsinki Times
)
🇨🇱
CHILE
— Checking in on the neighbours.
Chile’s newly-inaugurated President Kast has used his first visit abroad to meet President Milei in neighbouring Argentina. (
AA
)
Comment
: An early trip to Buenos Aires is tradition for Chilean leaders, but this one has carried extra weight given the Kast-Milei alignment on philosophy (conservative), issues (the Falklands/Malvinas), and rapport (major bromance on display). Kast also wants to replicate some of Milei’s pro-market vibes back in the world’s largest copper producer, though their shared tough-on-crime approach took a hit after a Chilean fugitive guerrilla evaded Argentine arrest just before Kast’s visit.
🇮🇩
INDONESIA — Trafficking.
Prosecutors have charged 18 women and a man for allegedly buying 34+ newborns from vulnerable parents and selling them for profit, with at least 10 apparently ending up in Singapore at $14k each. The 70-year-old ringleader, Lie Siu Luan, faces up to 15 years in prison and fines of up to 5 billion rupiah ($290k). (
The Straits Times
)
🇸🇸
SOUTH SUDAN — My administration, but not me.
President Kiir has dismissed South Sudan's parliamentary speaker after Kiir’s own party lawmakers filed a petition alleging the speaker’s involvement in corruption. (
Reuters
)
Comment:
Just weeks after dismissing his own finance minister, and months out from December’s elections, this Kiir-driven palace turnover against the backdrop of a simmering semi-civil-war is giving vibes there’ll be no elections at all.
Extra Intrigue
The Intrigue jobs board
💼
Communications Manager @
International Seabed Authority
in Jamaica
Public Affairs
@
Airbus
in Beijing, China
Security Intelligence Analyst
@
European Investment Bank
in Luxembourg
Country Insights Specialist
@
Ikea
in Sydney, Australia
From our sponsors
File with Cash App Taxes.
Now that tax season is here, there's no better time to file with Cash App Taxes. It's fast, 100% free, and it only takes a few minutes. Cash App Taxes is a
completely free way
to file your federal and state taxes-and get your refund*.
Ambassador of the day
Credits: Fred Dufour / NBC News.
Meet Lamia Hariri
,
Syria’s newly appointed ambassador to Greece.
She’s got the kind of LinkedIn trajectory you wouldn’t believe: back during the Assad family dictatorship, she was Assad’s envoy to Cyprus, but defected in 2012 once Assad started massacring his own people in the streets.
It was a big deal at the time given
a
) she was the niece of Assad’s VP,
b
) her husband (ambassador to the UAE) resigned shortly afterwards, and
c
) others like Assad’s ambassador to Iraq also quit around the same time.
But since jihadist-turned-statesman al-Sharaa ousted Assad and took the helm, there’ve been questions swirling around the role of women in his administration. His move last year to appoint Hind Kabawat — the only woman and Christian — to his first cabinet  turned heads, but so did his effort to avoid a question in London last week about whether he’d ever accept a woman as president.
Anyway, congrats to Ambassador Hariri, who stood up for her principles, and now gets a second chance to serve.
Today’s poll
Do you think this US-Iran ceasefire will really last?
🕊️ Yes, everyone needs this war to end
🚫 No, Trump won't accept this status quo
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think this private credit news is concerning?
🤢
Yes, the signs are all there (71%)
🥱
No, the system is working amid market jitters (28%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (1%)
Your two cents:
🤢
D.H:
“Cracks are appearing in other areas of the global economy as well. This might simply be the first '
brick to fall
'.”
✍️
J.M:
“I think it's more indicative of either retail investors not understanding the investment, or financial advisors not properly explaining the risks.”
✍️
J.B:
“Honestly, the average citizens of most countries could care less about how much money ultra rich family offices lose.”