URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/why-bonds-are-going-crazy
Title: 🌍 Why bonds are going crazy

Today’s briefing:
— Why bonds are going crazy
— This princess will marry a rapper
— Taiwan’s sweet secret weapon
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Folks (in the US)… Powerball is up to $1.7 billion and you best believe I’ve got my ticket. I’ve already spent a good chunk of my winnings (after the cash I’ll give my friends and family, and charity of course…).
And yes, I know, the odds of winning the lottery are worse than me actually finding something I’ve lost by “
looking in the last place I left it
”, but I still think the $10 ticket is worth the daydream. I mean what else am I gonna do, buy government bonds?
Which reminds me, today’s briefing is on
government bonds
. So let’s dive in?
Deadline of the day
Yesterday
(Thursday)
That’s when President Trump’s latest two-week end-the-war deadline on Russia expired.
Name’s bond. Government bond.
It’s time to talk bonds again, dear Intriguer.
Why?
Because when financial markets sh** their pants then pretend like nothing happened, we
have
to know what happened. Was it a virus? A scare? Bad shrimp?
So here’s a recap, using
Bond
film titles for guidance.
For Your Eyes Only
A super quick bonds recap
:
g
overnments borrow cash by selling bonds, which are basically promises to repay that cash with interest (aka ‘yield’).
But when broader rates rise, existing bonds don’t look so attractive and their price drops. That’s why
bond prices and yields always move in opposite directions
.
And this week, investors have been ditching their 30-year bonds, driving yields up:
US
yields tipped back over the feared 5% mark
UK
yields were at their highest since 1998
French
yields hit another 14-year high, and
Even
Japan's
famously low yields hit a new top!
But why are investors selling their bonds?
Because trust is in…
Skyfall
Investors are losing faith that governments are still willing or able to
a
) balance their budgets, and
b
) tackle inflation.
Sure, countries that issue their own currency (the US, Japan, the UK etc) can just create the money to pay back bonds — not an option for others (like France, using the euro).
But either way, if markets lose faith in government budgets, investors assume all the inevitable money creation will just
fuel inflation and weaken the currency
— and no investor wants to get repaid in a weaker currency getting eroded by inflation.
So investors start demanding higher interest (yield) to hold longer-term debt (bonds).
But why are investors losing faith in governments? It partly relates to the…
Spectre
… of
domestic politics
, with various messes in
Japan
(the PM might not survive the year),
France
(another no-confidence vote on Monday), and
the UK
(six PMs in 15 years).
And when you’re busy just surviving each day, it doesn’t leave a lot of bandwidth for those tough but necessary budget calls (raising taxes / cutting spending). Even the UK’s Starmer — enjoying a solid majority — is facing real doubts around his autumn budget.
Throw in the US — with Musk’s DOGE cost-cutting falling way short, Trump’s tariff revenue getting ruled illegal, and spending still rising — and bond investors get jittery.
Still, markets managed to calm down a bit by Wednesday, thanks to…
The Man with the Golden Gun
(aka Fed Chair Jerome Powell)
He didn’t do anything Wednesday, but markets are now 100% certain he
will
do something at the next Fed interest rates meeting on the 17th. Why?
Wednesday’s
worse-than-expected US job numbers
vindicated his Jackson Hole hint — the bigger US risk is now around jobs rather than inflation, meaning the Fed will cut rates.
And as you’ll recall from above, lower rates and lower inflation both encourage investors to pile back into bonds, which is what just happened, cooling yields.
And so what was that whole pants incident after all, dear Intriguer? A virus? A scare? Bad shrimp? We’d say it’s looking more and more like a virus (the structural problems above), meaning this week’s cyclical cleanse might not be the long-term cure.
And that leaves us wondering if global bond markets will just (sorry)
Die Another Day
.
Intrigue’s Take
Lots of economic rules are now under pressure, including a big one: in a crisis, investors traditionally pile into
the great safe-haven
: the US dollar. Even when that crisis is
US-made
(2008), investors run to the US. The result has always been US rates and the dollar rising and falling together (while others have to do the opposite to defend
their currency).
But there’s
a chart
doing the rounds showing
this golden rule has now snapped
, with the US dollar now just behaving like most other currencies (ie, moving in the opposite direction to rates). So something else is now pushing the dollar down:
The
USD
has had its worst half-year since the 1970s, while
Alternatives like the
yen
and Swiss
franc
(plus Bitcoin) have soared, and
Central banks now hold more
gold
than treasuries for the first time since the 90s.
What’s happening?
There are of course benefits to a weaker dollar (your exports seem cheaper).
But the data shows the US dollar-rates link broke in April, so…
what happened in April?
Economists like Adam Posen argue the obvious trigger was
Liberation Day,
and yet the fact the link has
stayed broken ever since
suggests it’s not just about investors fearing US tariffs, but rather investors fearing broader US
unpredictability
, whether in spending (The Big Beautiful Bill), central bank independence (pressure on Powell and Cook), or beyond.
Sound even smarter:
September has historically been a selling month for long-term bonds, as bankers return from the break wanting to zhuzh up (love that word) their portfolios.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇫🇷
FRANCE
-
Collecting signatures
.
President Macron says 26 countries are now ready to provide security guarantees to Ukraine in the event of a peace deal to end Russia’s war. Details remain scant, but the guarantees appear to be a mix of deploying peacekeepers, offering training, sending military aid, and providing logistical support. (
Politico
)
Comment:
This Europe-led ‘coalition of the willing’ is finally clarifying what exactly it might be willing to do, so it now goes to the US for clarification around its proposed ‘backstop role’ in all this (all we know is the White House is ruling out sending troops).
🇵🇬
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
-
Look who’s here
.
UN leader Antonio Guterres wraps his historic visit to Papua New Guinea today (Friday), the first-ever by a UN chief. He used his parliamentary address to a) praise PNG as champions of international solutions (particularly around climate), but also b) urged the nation to lift its game on women’s rights. (
UN News
)
🇮🇷
IRAN
-
Not on the shopping list
.
Ahead of this year’s UN General Assembly in New York, US officials are reportedly considering banning Iranian diplomats from visiting Costco and Sam’s Club while in town — a local fave for any sanctioned regime officials. (
NBC
)
🇨🇾
CYPRUS
-
Tap the brakes.
Brussels has launched a probe into possible criminal offences around a proposed submarine electricity cable connecting the Israeli and Greek power grids via Cyprus. (
Euractiv
)
Comment
:
The project has already faced delays and financial hurdles, plus opposition from Turkey — the Turks say the project would impact their maritime zones, but we suspect Ankara’s opposition also stems from the way this project would circumvent Turkey’s usual energy hub role.
🇦🇺
AUSTRALIA
-
You can’t stay.
Canberra has passed legislation allowing Australia to deport non-citizens with criminal convictions to third countries. It paves the way for Australia’s new 30-year deal with Nauru (pop 12,000), sending up to ~US$1.6B in cash for Nauru to host up to 350 deportees. (
Straits Times
)
Comment
:
There are rumours the US is working on something similar with Palau. Speaking of US deportations…
🇧🇴
BOLIVIA
-
Be gone.
US authorities just deported Bolivia’s former interior minister Arturo Murillo, after he served four years for money laundering. He now faces further corruption and protester-death charges back home. (
RegTechTimes
)
🇲🇱
MALI - Higher authority.
Mali has filed a case against neighbouring Algeria at the International Court of Justice for what it describes as “
blatant aggression
”. It relates to the shooting down of a Malian counter-terrorist drone back in April. (
Reuters
)
Comment
:
This is obviously about more than a drone — Mali accuses Algeria of quietly backing armed separatists, while the Algerians accuse Mali of failing to uphold a peace agreement with Tuareg rebels.
Extra Intrigue
In other worlds…
Tech:
A Chilean not-for-profit is leading a project to develop
a new open-source large language model
specifically for Latin America.
Health:
A
new study
published in
Science
has linked air pollution to dementia.
Royalty:
A
Dubai princess is engaged
to Moroccan-American rapper, French Montana.
From our sponsors
Want to get smarter about financial markets?
Join 200,000 investors who get Opening Bell Daily in their inbox — it’s packed with Wall Street data and analysis you won’t find anywhere else.
Subscribe free.
Mission of the day
Credits: Intrigue.
Every country leverages its strengths to lure the great and the powerful through its embassy gates: Finnish diplomats famously use saunas, Tokyo’s missions always put on a fantastic spread, and the Brazilians won’t let you leave until you’ve slurped that caipirinha.
But when most of the world doesn’t technically recognise you as a sovereign nation, you need to dig even deeper to fill that room. And that’s precisely what Taiwan did at its 17-acre de-facto DC
embassy estate
(Twin Oaks) last night, unleashing the democratic island’s
ultimate
secret weapon: boba (bubble) tea. Needless to say, we partook.
Most countries have super-strict rules around how (or even if) their diplomats can engage with Taiwan. But thankfully we’re now
ex
-diplomats, because there’s absolutely no limit to the number of protocols we’d happily breach to get our hands on that sweet sweet boba.
Friday Quiz
Test your knowledge of this week’s news.
Which country once issued a postage stamp that doubles as a vinyl?
🇸🇬 Singapore
🇧🇷 Brazil
🇧🇹 Bhutan
🇦🇲 Armenia
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Which country demanded a meeting with TikTok executives?
🇧🇴 Bolivia
🇺🇸 The US
🇨🇳 China
🇲🇾 Malaysia
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Who's now in trouble over leaked calls?
🇦🇷 Milei
🇵🇱 Tusk
🇰🇵 Kim
🇷🇺 Putin
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate