URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/reduced-size-template-b440101cd460a03e
Title: 🌍 Why China is flipping out at Japan

Today’s briefing:
— Why China is flipping out at Japan
— A pizzeria’s global apology
— They wanted to tax
what
?!
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. There was once an ambassador who partied too hard, and quickly made enemies among the embassy’s ritzy neighbours. They complained, but he ignored them all because hey, diplomatic immunity.
Then one of the shrewder neighbours managed to track down the direct email address for the ambassador’s boss back home (the head of the foreign ministry) and sent footage of the envoy’s raging all-night parties.
This shrewd neighbour never actually heard back, but you know what? She never heard any more ambassadorial parties, either.
Anyway, today’s briefing is about two other testy neighbours, and
why a single sentence out of Tokyo has got China so hot n’ bothered
.
PS -
¿Hablas español?
¡Check out
our weekly edition in Spanish
!
Number of the day
~60%
That’s the proportion of Ecuador’s voters who rejected the weekend’s referendum proposal to lift a ban on hosting foreign bases, dealing a blow to President Noboa’s hopes of enlisting more in-country US support against rising insecurity.
You can’t say that!
The prime minister of Japan, Sanae Takaichi
It was a mild and uneventful Friday back on November 7th: the onsens were steaming, the maples were blazing, and the salarymen were scurrying. Japan was Japaning, until…
New prime minister Sanae Takaichi took the Diet floor and answered a question with this:
"
If there is a Taiwan contingency where the Chinese side uses warships or engages in other armed actions,
it could constitute a 'survival-threatening situation' for Japan.
”
You might think that's just stating the obvious: if someone tries to invade a fellow democracy barely ~110km (70mi) away, yep... that's kind of a big deal, right? Particularly for a nation like Japan so trade-dependent on open sea lanes.
But China has flipped out
:
China’s consul-general in Osaka
tweeted
(then
deleted
) that “
those who dare to provoke China’s sovereignty over Taiwan will have their filthy necks cut off
”
Its tourism ministry has
urged
against
visiting Japan,
Its defence ministry has
warned
Japan it
faces
a “
crushing defeat
”, and
Its coast guard has just
sailed
through the Japan-controlled Senkaku Islands (which China
claims
as its own "
Diaoyu
").
W
hy
t
his
f
irestorm? (or you might know the acronym, '
WTF?
')
From China's perspective
, Takaichi's words raised alarm bells because of...
Who Takaichi is
: a hawkish protégé of Japan's late nationalist leader, Shinzo Abe
What she was referencing
: Abe's 2015 security law
loosened
Japan’s pacifist constitution so it can join foreign wars in a "
survival-threatening situation
", and...
What Takaichi wants
: China therefore frames her words as
a
) a reversal of Japan’s views on Taiwan,
b
) a revival of Japan’s militarism (near the 80th anniversary of its WWII surrender), and
c
) a resurgence of Japan’s interference in China's affairs (China claims Taiwan, which Japan once colonised).
But there are probably also a few
other drivers at play
:
First
,
ambition
: while it's mellowed, China’s diplomats still play "
wolf warrior
" in hopes of a career bump, and this particular guy (Xue Jian) is a repeat offender — ie, that threat to behead Japan's PM is partly another
please-promote-me
loyalty flex (#careertips).
Second
,
destabilisation
: Beijing openly dislikes Japanese hawks like Takaichi, so this heavy response to her remarks is an early opportunity to impose real pain on Japan then link it to her leadership. Ie, if folks in Japan want the pain to stop, maybe pick another leader.
Third
,
deterrence
: China’s ol' "
kill the chicken to scare the monkey
" proverb comes to mind here: by dunking on Japan, you're hoping to rattle everyone else watching in hopes they'll think very carefully before ever saying the t-word (Taiwan) out loud again. And...
Fourth
,
normalisation
: recall China paired its flip-out over Nancy Pelosi's 2022 Taiwan visit with a ratcheting-up of drills around the self-ruling democracy that've now become the new normal. Like boiling that frog, it's about slowly dialling up the operational tempo to back your territorial claims. So it's noteworthy that China has likewise now paired its latest flip-out with a ratcheting up of patrols through the Senkaku / Diaoyu Islands.
Anyway, that's why China is freaking out over a single line uttered by Japan's new PM.
Intrigue’s Take
If you really think about it, the wildest part of all this is the possibility of a nuclear-armed UN Security Council member invading a self-ruling democracy that has never once belonged to the People's Republic of China.
And Takaichi hinged her words on that one possibility: "
If
there is a Taiwan contingency where the Chinese side uses warships or engages in other armed actions, it
could
...
"
So sure, maybe one lesson amongst all this is that political leaders are often best to just
avoid answering hypotheticals
— you’re not Geoffrey Robertson, and real life is infinitely more complex than any one question can possibly capture, yet your answer can still be the real-world pretext your authoritarian neighbours need to start steaming vessels your way.
But still, the problem here is really the possibility of an invasion. Not any words about it.
And yet nobody is talking about that particular problem right now, precisely because everyone's still gawking at the latest twist in Beijing's performative outrage. Which maybe brings us to another driver behind this whole episode: flip out enough at someone else's words, and maybe the world will forget about your actions?
Sound even smarter:
Japanese outlets are reporting a senior Tokyo official (Masaaki Kanai, the head of the Japanese foreign ministry’s Asia and Oceania bureau) is now en route to meet his Chinese counterpart (Liu Jinsong) in Beijing for de-escalation talks.
If you’d like to dive a little deeper into
why China is so focused on Taiwan
, check out
our special edition
!
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
Fossil Fuel Treaty
The World Needs a Fossil Fuel Treaty
Wealthy nations have ramped up fossil fuel production by 40% since the Paris Agreement, putting us on track for 120% more coal, oil & gas than the 1.5°C limit allows.
But change is coming. Frontline nations are leading the charge for a green transition, with Colombia hosting the ‘First International Conference for the Phase Out of Fossil Fuels’ in April 2026.
As nations gather in Belém for COP30, this is the moment to build momentum behind the call for a Fossil Fuel Treaty to create a just, fossil-free world for all.
Find out more about the Fossil Fuel Treaty.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇬🇧
UNITED KINGDOM
-
Asylum changes.
The UK’s home secretary is today (Monday) expected to announce a series of changes to the British asylum system, including an end to automatic housing benefits, a shift to temporary status, and a 20-year waiting period (up from five years) to apply for permanent residence. (
France24
)
🇨🇱
CHILE
-
To a runoff.
Chileans will have to vote in a 14 December runoff after nobody won Sunday’s first round election outright. Polls now favour hard-conservative José Antonio Kast to beat the ruling coalition’s Communist Party candidate Jeannette Jara, in an election dominated by crime and immigration. (
Al Jazeera
)
Comment
: As polarised as Chilean politics can be, this is also an illustration of the challenges of a two-round system: the centre fractures itself into irrelevance during round one, leaving voters to pick between more hardline options in round two.
🇰🇷
SOUTH KOREA
-
Investment bonanza.
Several major South Korean corporations like Hyundai and Samsung have used a meeting with President Lee to unveil massive new investment pledges back home. (
Reuters
)
Comment
: Just days after the US and Korea released details of their trade deal (featuring $350B in pledged Korean investments into the US), these new domestic pledges (encouraged by President Lee) look a lot like an attempt to curb criticism back home: ie yes we’re investing in the US, but we’re still committed to Korea.
🇬🇷
GREECE
-
Hit the gas.
Ukraine has signed a deal to buy US-origin gas via Greece to help counter Russia’s continued attacks on Ukraine’s energy infrastructure. Meanwhile, Ukraine’s Friday hit on Russia’s Novorossiysk port has halted ~2% of world oil supplies. (
EuroNews
)
🇮🇩
INDONESIA
-
Troops for Gaza?
During a visit by Jordan’s king, Indonesia’s defence minister has revealed he’s readying 20,000 troops to help with healthcare and construction work as part of the planned international stabilisation force (ISF) in Gaza. (
Antara
)
Comment
: The UN Security Council’s Gaza vote is due in New York today (Monday), proposing that Trump’s Peace Board run Gaza for two years with ISF support. But it’s vague on details, faces a Russian counter-proposal, and was rejected by Hamas overnight — the Palestinian group is now dismissing any foreign military presence plus any talk of disarmament (two key pillars of Trump’s peace plan).
🇨🇩
DR CONGO
-
Signed.
Meeting in Qatar, the Democratic Republic of the Congo has signed a peace framework with the Rwandan-backed M23 armed group. (
BBC
)
Comment
: If you’re feeling deja vu, it’s because the US brokered a ceasefire between Congo and Rwanda back in June, but M23 wasn’t directly involved — the group always favoured these parallel Qatar-brokered talks which have now borne fruit. With M23 now a signatory, there’s hope any ceasefire might hold this time around.
🇦🇷
ARGENTINA
-
Mine that glacier.
President Milei is reportedly planning to tighten the legal definition of Argentina’s glaciers in a way that’d help foreign miners (like Switzerland’s Glencore, Canada’s Lundin and Australia’s BHP) accelerate stalled projects. (
Bloomberg
$)
Comment
: This idea has been around before, but Milei’s success at last month’s mid-terms means he might actually pull the trigger this time. He wants to turn Argentina into a major copper supplier, just as the energy transition ramps up the world’s thirst for the reddish metal.
Extra Intrigue
🤣
Your weekly roundup of the world’s lighter news
Egypt has revealed
its new capital will be called
… The New Capital.
Authorities have
temporarily halted flights in South Korea
to avoid disturbing the half a million students sitting Korea’s much-feared university entrance exam.
Authorities in Canada have marvelled that a guy who
stole a passenger bus
still picked up commuters, refused an expired pass, and managed to return the ‘accordion-style’ bus without a scratch.
A Frenchman has found a cool
$800K worth of gold bars
while digging for a swimming pool in his backyard.
And a
pizzeria owner in Italy has apologised
(
🇹🇼
) after his video criticising a group of “
Chinese tourists
” (they were from Taiwan) somehow managed to offend both China and Taiwan.
Tax of the day
There are only two certainties in life: death and taxes. But not in the northernmost Italian region of South Tyrol, which has now dropped its plans for a dog tax.
The planned levy would’ve imposed a $100 annual fee for resident dog owners, and a $1.70 daily tax for tourists with furry friends. The idea was to cover the rising costs of cleaning up all the dog doo-doo in a region with high dog ownership. But after months of backlash, authorities have now smashed that ctrl-z combo.
In case you’re wondering, yes, it’s the same Italian region that famously tried to impose mandatory DNA testing to identify lazy dog owners leaving nuggets everywhere.
Today’s poll
Would you approve of hosting foreign bases in your country?
👍 Yes, if it helped tackle insecurity
🛡️ No, it's a violation of sovereignty
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Thursday’s poll:
What do you think is the biggest issue facing energy markets today?
💲
Price (17%)
⚡️ Supply (34%)
🌤️ Reliability (22%)
🏭 Emissions (23%)
✍️ Other (write us!) (4%)
Your two cents:
⚡️
T.K:
“Availability of transmission headroom technically drives all the other factors.”
🏭
M.C:
“The least expensive energy sources often have the highest emissions, and environmentalism is a luxury that the energy-poor cannot afford.”
✍️
C.M:
“Outdated transmission networks limit the impact and expansion of renewables as well as making networks more vulnerable to extreme weather.”