URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/tuesday-b736
Title: 🌍 Why the world is yelling about elections in Romania

IN TODAY’S EDITION
1️⃣ Why the world is yelling about Romania
2️⃣ What’s happening in commodities
3️⃣ Thingamajig of the day
Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
One of the highlights of my travels was attending this gathering in Georgia (the country, not the state). The gathering can only be described as a political bootcamp of sorts for participants from fledgling democracies around the so-called ‘Black Sea rim’ region.
It was honestly a super informative crash course, spanning all sorts of topics ranging from fighting disinformation in the age of AI, to understanding basic legal principles of democracy like the separation of powers, and how to engage in strategic policy planning for one’s country.
My key takeaways? Firstly, that all politicians from democracies around the world really ought to partake in some version of this bootcamp. Secondly, that the Romanian participants were some of the most impressive and innovative folks I’ve ever met. We dive into some of what’s been happening in
Romania’s politics
in today’s top story.
PS
- Our very own Kristen is in
Houston
for CERAWeek if you’re in town and want to connect!
THE HEADLINES
US stocks plunge amid tariff turmoil.
The
S&P500 has now lost $4T in value
since its February peak, while Tesla stocks alone closed 15% down on Monday — the slump, plus further drops in Bitcoin below $80k, come as recession fears and uncertainty around Trump’s economic agenda fan a selloff.
Moscow hit by massive drone counter-attack.
Ukraine has counter-attacked with its biggest
drone strike on Moscow
and its surrounds to date, using as many as 300 drones. The counter-attack came just hours before Saudi-hosted peace talks kicked off with delegations from Ukraine and the US.
Kurds sign deal to integrate into Syria.
The US-backed and Kurdish-led Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) have
signed an agreement
with Syrian leader Ahmed al-Sharaa to integrate all SDF military and civilian institutions into the Syrian state. It’s a major step towards uniting Syria after years of civil war, just days after
violence erupted across Syrian coastal cities
.
Former Philippines president arrested.
Manila police just arrested Rodrigo Duterte on an International Criminal Court (ICC) warrant over
alleged crimes against humanity
during his deadly war on drugs. The current president (Marcos Jr) had initially refused to cooperate with the ICC, but changed his tune as his ties with the Duterte family soured. It’s unclear whether Marcos will now extradite Duterte to stand trial in The Hague.
Tanker and cargo ship collide off UK coast.
Two vessels continue to burn off the eastern UK coast after a
cargo ship hit an oil tanker
carrying jet fuel, in one of the country’s worst recent maritime incidents. All but one crewmember have been accounted for.
TOP STORY
Why the world is yelling about elections in Romania
We’ve long pondered when to write about Romania — when the unheard-of Călin Georgescu won the first round election in November? When a court then annulled his win over alleged Russian TikTok interference in December? Or when US VP JD ‘triple acronym’ Vance used the whole ordeal to
dunk on Romania’s democracy
in February?
But now we’re somehow in March, and a court is due today (Tuesday) to issue a final ruling on whether Georgescu can run in May’s re-scheduled elections. So Intriguers, our time has arrived.
First, care to stalk Georgescu’s LinkedIn profile with us?
He’s humbled and honoured to have done a PhD in soil sciences, stints in the US and UK,  various gigs within Romania’s government, and even a
UN special rapporteur role
on human rights and hazardous wastes.
But then, he launched his long-shot 2024 presidential bid and… nobody cared, until a sudden late surge of buzz on TikTok helped him win November’s first round with 23%.
Second
, the blowtorch of
public scrutiny
then really hit, focussing less on his profile, and more on his platform: classic populist-right fare, with a sprinkling of doubt about the statehood of neighbouring Ukraine, plus a
jus
of praise for Russia’s Vladimir Putin.
That blowtorch then shifted to Georgescu’s signed declaration claiming he was somehow the sole candidate who had zero campaign funding.
Third
, Romanian spooks then
declassified
intelligence
(
🇷🇴
) alleging an unnamed state (Russia) had used 800 TikTok accounts to undermine the election by pumping narratives in Georgescu’s favour. So a court annulled his win in December, and more probes followed, including into why one of his bodyguards — who visited Moscow last year — had $2M in cash stashed at his pad.
But by March, all this attention — plus his pivot to become
a martyr
standing up against an unpopular establishment — helped Georgescu lead in opinion polls until Sunday’s electoral authority banned him from running again, arguing he had "
violated the very obligation to defend democracy
".
So what now?
Today’s court ruling seems unlikely to land in Georgescu’s favour. But that doesn’t mean this is the end of the road, with speculation swirling he’ll quickly endorse one of the various like-minded nationalist candidates now gunning for their shot.
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
While you ponder whether Romania’s authorities are defending democracy or destroying it, here are three things worth keeping in mind:
First, this isn’t new
: just in October, a court banned another Russia-friendly populist-right candidate (Diana Iovanovici Sosoaca), saying her statements systematically undermined Romania's constitution and Euro-NATO alignment.
Second, this isn’t happening in a vacuum
: folks in Romania are frustrated at the scandal-plagued major parties and the quality of government services.
And third, this isn’t just a Romania thing
: electoral authorities everywhere are grappling with similar toxic doubts around the democratic implications of tech, campaign finance, and hybrid warfare.
That all makes for fertile ground for these kinds of constitutional crises. Then there’s the question of how democracies ought to respond, with another three thoughts:
First
, Georgescu seems to have benefited from an
epic Streisand Effect
here — the state’s complaint just shifted things from a debate on Georgescu’s niche platform, to a referendum on over-reach by an unpopular state.
Second
, this whole ordeal reflects a broader shift away from old-school fears of electoral fraud to today’s greyer areas of tech-enabled narrative-shaping, placing much more pressure on
official
credibility
in adjudicating calls.
And
third
, while Russia denies any role, it’s the very existence of this debate right now (more than any particular side within it) that risks
eroding public faith
in democracy, to the benefit of hostile authoritarians everywhere.
Anyway, take some solace that Romania’s people feel just as conflicted as you do: 46% say the Georgescu ban is unjustified, while 41% describe it as necessary.
Also worth noting:
VP Vance earlier criticised the intelligence against Georgescu as “
flimsy
”.
Prosecutors have already brought six criminal charges against Georgescu, including on leading a fascist group and lying about his campaign financing.
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇯🇵
Japan
: Trade minister Yoji Muto has
travelled to the US
in a last-ditch attempt to score a tariff exemption for Japan. Tokyo is concerned about the looming 25% tariffs on all steel and aluminium imports, and a possible levy on auto imports that Donald Trump threatened back in February.
🇸🇪
Sweden
: Stockholm’s arms exports reached a
record high of nearly $3B
last year, up 63% over 12 months as a spooked world hunkers down. Sweden’s top buyers include the UAE, the US, and Brazil.
🇦🇺
Australia
: Russia has warned of “
grave consequences
” if Australia
deploys troops in Ukraine
as part of any peacekeeping mission. The statement emerged after Australia’s prime minister last week declined to rule out joining the UK-led “
coalition of the willing
” on Ukraine.
🇸🇷
Suriname
: States across the Americas have
elected Suriname’s foreign minister (Albert Ramdin)
as the next head of the Organization of American States (OAS). In an initial speech to the bloc’s assembly in DC, he’s urged greater regional unity, dialogue, and sustainable development.
🇮🇶
Iraq
: The US has
annulled a waiver for Iraq to import Iranian electricity
, as part of the Trump administration’s
maximum pressure
campaign against Tehran. A spokesperson from Iraq’s electricity ministry says the move will impact 30% of the country’s power needs, so it’s looking for alternatives.
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Our commodities corner is back
Gas
: Notwithstanding the recent bumps in transatlantic ties, the EU’s top energy official has told us the
bloc won’t (can’t?) stop buying US LNG
any time soon.
Oil
: Russia looks set to
resume oil and gas operations
in Iraqi Kurdistan as it seeks to make up lost influence in Europe and Syria.
Coal
: India’s thermal
coal imports declined
for the sixth straight month in February, as local manufacturing activity slows down.
Coffee
: Low rainfall in Brazil has again
pushed up coffee prices
, which already soared over the past year.
THINGAMAJIG OF THE DAY
Credits: Shimadzu Corp.
Tired of your office rival outdoing you with their expensive new
watch
timepiece? Well, Japan has come up with the ultimate one-up: Shimadzu, a precision instruments maker, just dropped its strontium optical lattice clock.
Sure, it’s the size of a small refrigerator and costs $3.3M, but it’s 100 times more accurate than the traditional caesium atomic clocks used to define seconds, and we’re guessing a
million
times more accurate than Karen’s Rolex.
DAILY POLL
How do you feel about Romania's ban on Georgescu?
👋 Good riddance -- he benefited from Russian interference
😩 Urrgh -- you don't fight interference with interference
✍️ Other (write us!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
What do you think Syria's weekend of violence means?
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
📈
It's a scar on the way to a brighter future (15%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
📉
It all portends darker days ahead (82%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!) (2%)
Your two cents:
📉
S.A.M
: “They don't have a state strong enough to be the monopoly for violence. Until this changes, violence will continue.”
📈
R.S:
“There needs to be more listening and peaceful debate, and less reactionary anger.”
✍️
M.P:
“No one can reliably guess what will happen in Syria, there’s too many players, but I think if things turn to ‘dark days’ it’s important to remember it will be because of a lack of support from outside forces with their own geopolitical objections (or proxy wars for the same reason), not due to some inevitability people seem inclined to believe about the Middle East.”
Was this forwarded to you? We're a team of ex-diplomats producing a concise and engaging geopolitical briefing for 120k+ leaders each day.
It’s free to subscribe
.