URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/iran-just-bomb-three-neighbours
Title: 🌍 Why did Iran just bomb three of its neighbours?

Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
A spy once told me that there are no true friends in this world, just shared aims. I bet he’s real fun at parties.
Still, his comment sticks with me today as we lead with an update on why Iran just bombed three of its neighbours, and how a bewildering web of alliances, rivalries, and grievances is now roiling the region.
- Jeremy Dicker, Managing Editor
Was this forwarded to you? We're a team of ex-diplomats producing a concise and engaging geopolitical briefing for 85k+ leaders each day.
It’s free to subscribe
.
TODAY’S NEWS
Fighting intensifies in southern Gaza.
Some 7,000 Palestinians sheltering near the Nasser Hospital in Khan Younis, the biggest in southern Gaza, could be forced to flee as Israel-Hamas fighting intensifies in and around the city. The Israeli military is shifting its core offensive to central and southern Gaza, and says it detected mortar fire coming from the medical facility.
Ecuador prosecutor shot dead.
The prosecutor tasked with investigating last week’s brazen armed gang attack on a TV station was killed yesterday (Wednesday). It’s the latest incident in a surge of gang violence in the country, which has led President Noboa to declare a 60-day state of emergency.
Corruption case rocks Singapore.
Singapore’s transport minister has resigned after being charged with 27 offences, including corruption and obstruction of justice. The minister reportedly accepted gifts from a property tycoon, including theatre and football tickets. The case is rocking Singapore, long known for its rigorous governance.
Iowa sues TikTok.
Iowa’s attorney-general has launched a lawsuit against social media platform TikTok, alleging the app is deceiving parents about how difficult it is for children to access inappropriate content. The short video app, whose parent company is China-based, is facing lawsuits from Utah, Arkansas, and Indiana for similar reasons.
TOP STORY
Why did Iran just bomb three of its neighbours?
Source: Institute for the Study of War
Iran has hit targets in three neighbouring countries this week.
First
on Monday, it claimed a hit on an Israeli intelligence site in
Erbil
(the capital of Iraqi Kurdistan) in retaliation for recent Israeli strikes on Iranian interests.
There’ve been
reports
of Israeli intelligence operations in the area, though local leaders
rejected
Iran's claims, and the casualties were a Kurdish real estate tycoon and his family.
This wasn't Iran's
first attack
on Iraqi Kurdistan. Heck, it wasn’t even Iran’s
first attack
on a
tycoon's villa
in Iraqi Kurdistan.
Second
, and hours later, Iran says it hit ISIS targets in Syria's last opposition stronghold (
Idlib
) in retaliation for suicide bombings that killed 94 Iranians (who were marking the US assassination of an Iranian general in 2020).
Again, this wasn't Iran's
first attack
on ISIS targets in Syria.
Then
finally
on Tuesday, Iran used rockets and drones to hit two Jaish al-Adl strongholds over the border in
Pakistan
, reportedly killing two children.
In a rare instance of common ground, both the US and Iran consider Jaish al-Adl, or the 'Army of Justice', a terrorist group. It's a Sunni ethnic Baluch militia that operates along the Iran-Pakistan border, seeking an independent Baluchistan.
And again, this wasn't the
first time
Iran has gone after Jaish targets in Pakistan, but it’s Iran’s first such strike with missiles, and its deepest push into Pakistani turf yet.
So what's Iran up to?
Iran's foreign minister made a
controversial appearance
at Davos yesterday (Wednesday), arguing Iran has good relations with its neighbours and was just eliminating common enemies. But Iran likely had
other objectives
, including to:
show strength domestically after several recent security failures
show strength regionally after Israel hit an Iranian general in Syria, and
do it all in a way that avoids blowback (eg, targeting "
common enemies
").
Syria hasn’t commented yet, and Iraq realistically can't do much beyond lodging diplomatic protests. So that leaves nuclear-armed Pakistan.
And Pakistan was left with a choice
between a) looking weak, or b) retaliating and risking a broader conflict. With Pakistan’s powerful military establishment clearly embarrassed, it opted for option
b
overnight, launching
reciprocal strikes
on Baluch targets in Iran.
Iran seems to be getting some blowback after all.
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
Attack one neighbour on Monday, hit another two on Tuesday, then chill at Davos on Wednesday. It's like a weird cover of
that Craig David song
.
There are clearly local drivers at play: the Baluchs resent Iranian and Pakistani rule; ISIS hates Shiite-majority Iran; the Houthis want to consolidate their hold on power in Yemen; and Iran wants to expand its regional sway.
But zooming out, it’s so connected regionally - the US and others
see Iran
as the common thread, while Iran and its proxies say it's all the US and Israel.
And zooming out further, it’s connected globally. Russia is invading Ukraine with the help of both Iran (the two are about to
sign a treaty
) and North Korea (which just
ramped up tensions
with its own neighbour).
These days, everything’s connected.
Also worth noting:
The Saudi foreign minister
told
Davos, “
we agree that regional peace includes peace for Israel, but that can only happen through peace for Palestinians through a Palestinian state
.”
The US, which just re-designated the Houthis as terrorists,
says
it hit 14 Houthi pre-launch ballistic missiles overnight, while the Houthis hit a US civilian ship in the Gulf of Aden.
SUPPORTED BY FINANCE BUZZ
6 legit things to do to help financially…
These 6
small (but smart) moves
can help you supplement your income and earn legit cash – without doing much extra “work”!
Amazon hates when you do these 8 things (but they can't stop you)…
Here are
8 secret hacks
that you need to know if you're an Amazon shopper. They can help you save money, cancel unwanted subscriptions, and earn legit cash.
Hands down the laziest ways Americans are making money
… Check out these
unusual (but legit) ways people can stack their bank account
without leaving the house or getting a second job!
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇨🇳
China
: China’s top cyber watchdog is reportedly
investigating Chinese fast-fashion giant Shein’s
data handling practices ahead of the company’s US listing. The Cyberspace Administration of China wants to ensure Shein can avoid Chinese data leaking overseas.
🇸🇰
Slovakia
: The Slovak parliament has empowered the defence ministry to approve arms export, in theory
paving the way for arms deals with Ukraine
. Prime Minister Fico, who was sworn into office last October, was elected promising to halt weapon flows to Ukraine.
🇻🇳
Vietnam
: Vietnam Communist Party chief Nguyen Phu Trong attended a session of the National Assembly earlier this week after
rumours about his health
had emerged. At 79, he’s held the country’s top job since 2011.
🇧🇷
Brazil
: Talks to approve Brazilian plans to obtain a nuclear submarine could
wrap up in the next five years
(
🇧🇷
), according to the head of the International Atomic Energy Agency. But Brasilia must first agree to routine inspections, something it’s historically opposed.
🇸🇴
Somalia
: Search and
rescue operations
are ongoing off the coast of Somalia for two US Navy SEALs lost at sea. The operatives were part of a mission to intercept the shipment of Iranian weapons to Houthis last week.
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Here’s what people around the world were googling yesterday
🇷🇺
Russians
googled ‘Фаиль Алсынов’ (
Fail Alsynov
), an ethnic Bashkir activist who was
condemned to four years in prison
for inciting ethnic hatred (he denies the charges).
🇰🇪
Kenyan
fans searched for where to watch the ‘
DR Congo vs Zambia
’ Africa Cup of Nations
soccer match
(it was a draw).
🇹🇼
And folks in
Taiwan
looked up ‘新潮流’ (
New Tide
) after newly elected President William Lai announced he was
leaving the New Tide faction
of his Democratic Progressive Party, out of respect for the presidential office.
FLAG OF THE DAY
Lesotho has the world’s only national flag featuring a hat. Sitting elegantly on a horizontal blue, white, and green tricolour (representing the sky, peace and prosperity), you’ll find a traditional mokorotlo hat of the Basotho people. The landlocked kingdom (encircled by South Africa) adopted the flag in 2006.
Intrigue rating
: 9.3/10
DAILY POLL
If given the chance, would you redesign your country's flag?
💌 No, it's perfect as is
🖌️ Yes, I don't like it (tell us why!)
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Forecasting is notoriously tricky business, but it's fun. When do you think the Fed will start cutting interest rates?
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🟢
Q1 2024 (2%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️
🟡
Q2 2024 (21%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟠
Q3 2024 (39%)
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️
🔴
Q4 2024 (14%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️
🔵
Nah, it's gonna be in 2025 (23%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!) (1%)
Your two cents:
🟡
F.M:
““It should be Q2, way before the US presidential election to avoid any accusation of partisanship."
🟠
H.W:
“Spending is still too wild and out of control.”
🔵
M.D:
“It took 20 years to beat inflation on the 1970 and 80s. It will end when the government reins in its budget and that's not happening anytime soon.”
Share the Intrigue