URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/why-china-is-so-angry-about-new-islands-23a6367c3d63797d
Title: 🌍 Why China is so angry about new islands

Today’s briefing:
— Why China is so angry about new islands
— Why Venezuelans are googling ‘Huawei’
— World’s weirdest new words
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. They say imitation is the ultimate form of flattery. In consumer retail, you know you’ve made it when your product line has dupes like “
lafufus
” (fake Labubus from Popmart) or the “
Wirkin
” bag (Walmart’s replica of the Hermes Birkin) on the market.
To a certain extent, the same can be said in international relations. For example, the UAE emulated Singapore’s growth model, and some former USSR states looked to the West for a framework for their new political systems.
We also see it in strategic military moves, like in today’s top story. We dig into how Vietnam really said “
hold my beer
” to China and embarked on its own
island-building efforts in the South China Sea
.
PS
— We’ll take
a quick break this Thursday and Friday
, but will be back from Monday!
Tenure of the day
2038
That’s when Lisa Cook was due to end her term on the Fed’s board, until President Trump
moved
to fire her over mortgage fraud allegations. Cook denies the claims and says the president has no authority to sack her, suggesting we’re now headed to court. If Professor Cook
is
fired, Trump appointees would be set to secure a Fed board majority.
Let there be
light
islands
A satellite image of China’s base at Fiery Cross Reef
We humans can create just about anything these days: self-heating mugs, lab-grown meat, KFC-flavoured toothpaste. So no harm in a few artificial islands, right? Wrong.
China’s foreign ministry just
rebuked
Vietnam for doing just that in the South China Sea (SCS), declaring Beijing “
firmly opposes relevant countries’ construction activities on islands and reefs they have illegally occupied
”.
What’s the problem?
If you look carefully at that wording, it’s not so much about the activity as the location: “
on islands and reefs they have illegally occupied
”. And that’s an important distinction, because (as we’ll see below) China is no stranger to a bit of artificial island building.
So why Beijing’s sudden sass?
A top US thinktank just dropped its latest
report
on Vietnam’s own island-building in the South China Sea, where players already claim varying degrees of ownership: China, Vietnam, Philippines, Malaysia, Taiwan, Brunei, and Indonesia (in descending order).
We say “
varying
” because the claims range from China’s ‘
nine-dash line
’ encompassing 90% of the sea (the size of Mexico), down to Indonesia and Brunei each claiming ~1%.
But Vietnam’s building spree isn’t just anywhere: it’s specifically in
the Spratly Islands
, which are perched smack bang in the middle of the South China Sea overlooking busy shipping lanes, rich fishing grounds, and presumed gas and oil reserves.
And
whoever controls the Spratlys controls the South China Sea
.
Enter outposts.
Vietnam
(like the Philippines, Malaysia, and Taiwan) has been building local outposts for decades, but this always involved zhushing up the islands and rocks already there, until…
Enter China.
Beijing got its first Spratlys toehold after a clash with Vietnam in 1988. It then built new “
fishermen shelters
” deep in Philippine waters from the 90s, nudging a shocked Manila to deliberately ground an old ship which it’s used as a makeshift outpost ever since.
But
China really hit the gas
once Xi Jinping took power from 2012, willing 13 sq km (5 sq mi) of new land into existence via both expansion and creation: those early “
fisherman shelters
” gave way to China’s seven Spratly bases, all despite pledging the opposite to President Obama, and getting its ‘nine-dash line’
rejected
by a top tribunal. So…
Re-enter Vietnam.
According to satellite pics analysed by the US thinktank above, Vietnam has now reclaimed land at all its 21 Spratly features (up from 11 four years ago). And it’s levelled up from a few humble pillboxes back then, to munition depots and a full runway. When you add all Vietnam’s reclaimed acreage in the area, it’s now about 70% of China’s total, and gaining.
Intrigue’s Take
So does any of this
really
matter? It’s a question occasionally posed in Western capitals querying how it’s their problem if distant nations fight over poop-covered rocks.
But there are a few answers.
First
, the world already agreed on a set of rules to resolve maritime border disputes: it’s called
the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea
, and it has little time for artificial islands beyond the need for tiny ‘safety zones’ around them.
Second
, with faith in international law waning, we’re seeing rivals race to
shape the maritime reality
in their own favour instead, or at least stop others from doing so. And that process just undermines international law even further, meaning…
Third
, as everyone rushes to build and fortify random rocks, the crowding of such an already packed strategic space just raises the risk of an accident or miscalculation. And with so many guns drawn, history reminds us this is all it takes to ignite a war.
A Private Circle for High-Net-Worth Peers
Long Angle
is a private, vetted community for HNW entrepreneurs and executives ($5M-$100M net worth). No membership fees.
Connect with self-made peers in confidential discussions and live meetups.
With $100M+ invested annually, secure preferential terms unavailable to individual investors.
Apply to Join
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇰🇷
SOUTH KOREA
-
When Lee met Trump.
President Lee’s meeting with his US counterpart has avoided public disagreement over Korea’s trade surplus and defence spending, with the two leaders instead finding common ground on…
North
Korea: responding to Lee’s calls to act as a peacemaker, Trump said he hopes to meet the North’s dictator this year. (
BBC
)
Comment
: In the midst of all the noise from presidential visits, the US and South Korea have yet to share details on the trade deal they reportedly agreed last month.
🇮🇱
ISRAEL
-
Air strikes.
Prime Minister Netanyahu’s office has tweeted that “
Israel deeply regrets the tragic mishap that occurred today
”, after President Trump criticised a deadly ‘double-tap’ strike on Gaza’s Nasser hospital. The 20 or more casualties include reporters and contractors for Reuters and Al Jazeera. (
NHK
)
🇺🇿
UZBEKISTAN
-
Welcome!
Jordanian King Abdullah II is on a regional tour through Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan, touting cooperation in everything from agriculture and education to tourism and transport. (
Times of Central Asia
)
Comment
: As sanctions disrupt Central Asia’s traditional economic reliance on Russia, Jordan is positioning itself as a gateway to the broader Levant and Gulf. The Jordanians (like everyone else) will also have an eye on Central Asia’s natural resources.
🇩🇪
GERMANY
-
A spy among us.
A year after arresting him, German prosecutors have now charged an American defence contractor on allegations he tried to sell China military secrets from a US base in Germany where he was stationed. (
Politico
)
🇮🇩
INDONESIA
-
They get paid how much?
Protestors have clashed with police after local outlets reported Indonesian parliamentarians earn upwards of $8k per month, including a hefty housing allowance. (
Straits Times
)
🇻🇪
VENEZUELA
-
Civilian volunteers.
Thousands have queued up to enlist in a civilian militia, after President Maduro warned of the “
threat
” of a US invasion. (
F24
)
Comment
: It’s likely a show of strength by Maduro after the US doubled its bounty for his arrest to $50M.
🇦🇺
AUSTRALIA
-
Iran out.
Canberra has expelled Iran’s ambassador after accusing Tehran of orchestrating two recent anti-Semitic attacks aimed at sowing “
hatred and division in our community
”. (
CNN
)
🇱🇾
LIBYA
-
Let’s chat.
Turkey’s spy chief, known for discreet visits that get results, has turned up in Benghazi to meet the local general controlling Libya’s east. (
Daily Sabah
)
Comment
: It’s a classic example of Turkish pragmatism: formally backing Libya’s Tripoli-based government, while simultaneously expanding ties with the shadow government in Benghazi. The goal seems to be a united, Turkey-friendly Libya.
Extra Intrigue
Here’s what people around the world are googling
Folks in
Germany
looked up “
Robert Habeck
”, the former economy minister who has
decided to quit politics
for an academic career instead.
Venezuelans
googled “
Huawei
” after dictator Nicolás Maduro used a speech to
brandish a new cell phone
which he claimed was a gift from China’s Xi Jinping.
And netizens in
Hong Kong
searched “
HSBC
” after the international bank announced it was
offering lower interest rates
for mortgages on the island.
Words of the day
Remember the good ol’ Cambridge dictionary?
It’s one of the few books professors might allow students to schlepp into exams, though it’s unclear what good a dictionary is when that essay on macroeconomics rolls around.
But still, take comfort that if you end up needing to double-check what “
skibidi
”, “
delulu
”, or “
tradwife
” mean when crunching out that graph on marginal propensity to save, the dictionary’s
newest version
has got you covered, plus an additional 6,000 other new words.
Today’s poll
Do you think President Trump can broker peace on the Korean Peninsula?
☮️ Yes, he's one of the few leaders on speaking terms with both the North and South
🎭 No, it's just for show
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think robots are the answer for shrinking-ageing economies?
🤖
Yes, here's why... (49%)
❌
No, here's why... (47%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (4%)
Your two cents:
🤖
V.K.F:
“Increases in productivity are how prosperity is won, and robots are just the latest version of that.”
❌
A:
“Even though it would serve as a temporary bandaid for a shrinking workforce, it won't address two key issues that will spiral the problem even further, A) a shrinking consumer population that will make our robot workers obsolete, and B) the lack of meaning that comes with employment.”
✍️
E.K.M:
“The issue isn’t labor, it’s power. AI takes a lot of energy to use, and current technology isn’t scalable without severely damaging the climate and local communities.”
❌
S.H:
“It will take longer than most people think to fill all the various positions needed with a robot.”