URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/why-everyone-s-cancelling-their-f-35s-87c1f947ea6260bc
Title: 🌍 Why everyone’s cancelling their F-35s

Today’s briefing:
— Why everyone’s cancelling their F-35s
— What real diplomats drive
— Have you been paying attention?
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. When I first got to the US, I quickly learned from my American classmates that defence was one of the few industries uniting the divergent interests of US states. And the jewel in its crown was the F-35 fighter jet program, boasting domestic supply chains spanning all 50 states and reportedly injecting ~$70 billion annually into the American economy.
OK, full disclosure, I think I probably actually learned that from watching
Top Gun
. Be that as it may,
the F-35 program
is still one of the US’s most important and valuable defence programs. And we’re writing about it today because word on the street is some foreign buyers are now thinking twice. Let’s nosedive in.
Meeting of the day
4:00pm
That’s when President Trump is scheduled to emerge at the White House today (Friday) with the leaders of Armenia and Azerbaijan,
potentially
announcing a peace agreement to end decades of hostilities between them.
Fly high
Here at Intrigue, we love a good pattern. Celebs getting new citizenships?
Story
. Everyone collecting exotic new toys?
Story
. Random ships exploding?
Story
.
So when various capitals started cancelling their F-35 fighter jet orders? Yep, story.
First, the facts
:
🇪🇸
Spain
just scrapped its plan to buy Lockheed Martin’s F-35
🇮🇳
India
has also semi-quietly told DC it no longer wants the coveted jet
🇨🇭
Switzerland
is debating its own order for three dozen F-35s
🇵🇹
Portugal
started looking for alternatives earlier this year, and
🇨🇦
Canada
announced its own F-35 review in April (
word
is the review suggests sticking with the F-35, though it’s ultimately PM Carney’s call).
Now we’re no Sherlock Holmes, but we saw the first season of
True Detective
, so can confidently yet mysteriously declare: “
There’s a shadow on the edge of this thing.
"
Second, the target
:
The F-35 is a
fifth-generation
fighter jet produced by US-based defence prime, Lockheed Martin Corp. The company describes the jet in three words: “
Lethal. Survivable. Connected.
”, which incidentally is how we’d describe spending a holiday with family.
It’s known for its
versatility
: it can hit targets in the air or down below, while using advanced sensors to collect huge amounts of info on enemy forces and terrain, all without being detected. That’s why Lockheed calls it the “
quarterback of the skies
”. We would’ve gone with “
the Kevin Bacon of the skies
”, but that’s why we’re not in defence marketing.
Third, the motive
: if it’s so piping hot, why are these capitals ditching it? Is it
too
hot?!
We initially wrote that ‘
too hot?!
’ line as a joke, but it’s partly true! Critics occasionally label the jet a ‘
Ferrari option
’, when a Ford would do. The periodic cost
overruns
don’t help, and many capitals want to
invest
in their own options.
But the critique that catches our eye is around
dependency
: sceptics argue owning an F-35 ties you to the US like how owning an iPhone ties you to Apple: you need ongoing HQ updates, patches, and maintenance for them to work.
And while the
timing
(amid US tariff and NATO threats) might
hint
at dependency fears, it was really
Portugal
’s defence minister who said the quiet bit out loud in March:
“
We cannot ignore the geopolitical environment in our choices. The recent position of the United States, in the context of NATO ... must make us think about the best options, because the predictability of our allies is a greater asset to take into account.
”
You know who else said the quiet bit out loud in March?
The US itself
, when the Pentagon had to issue a remarkable denial of any secret F-35 ‘
kill switch
’ (ie, any US ability to remotely disable the F-35). If you’ve reached a point where you feel the need to issue that kind of denial, it suggests trust is already fading.
And when it comes to major, cross-border, and multi-year defence projects, that’s always the secret ingredient:
trust
.
Intrigue’s Take
So, what’s the verdict here?
The F-35 has always been a tool of
US strategy
. That’s a feature, not a bug. You want access to the Kevin Bacon of the skies? You’ve got to play nice. Allies go to the front of the queue. But buy military kit from a rival like Russia, and you’re off the list, Turkey. Questions about your geopolitical interests not always aligning, and you’re off the list too, Saudi Arabia.
What
is
news is how this
causation can work both ways
, opening up vulnerabilities for the US. We got early hints when, for example, Turkey dragged its feet on Sweden’s NATO bid until the US restored Turkey’s access to the F-35. But maybe we’re seeing something else play out now, as the above allies essentially declare: if you’re going to play hard-ball like this, maybe we’ll spend our billions elsewhere.
And while losing an individual sale to Portugal or Switzerland might not be critical, the
impacts can accumulate
: reduced revenue for Lockheed means reduced cash for R&D which (over time) could mean a narrower military edge, less allied interoperability, and less US leverage.
Anyway, it’s Friday so go treat yourself to a Kevin Bacon film (start with
Footloose
, then see where the evening takes you).
Sound even smarter:
The F-35 program is operational across
20 armed forces
worldwide.
Each F-35 has ~30,000 parts provided by ~1,900 suppliers across the US and beyond, including the UK, Italy, Canada, Australia, Netherlands, Denmark, Norway, Japan, and Finland.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
Cap Plastics Now.
Big Oil, Big Plastic, Big Emissions. Cap Plastic Production Now.
The Global Plastics Treaty is our last best chance to end plastic pollution and contain greenhouse gas emissions.
Big Oil is lobbying to weaken the Global Plastics Treaty. Countries must stand firm and cap plastic production.
Learn more
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇮🇱
ISRAEL
-
Next steps.
Israel’s security cabinet has approved what it’s describing as expanded operations in Gaza, plus five principles for ending the war:
i
) disarming Hamas,
ii
) returning the hostages,
iii
) demilitarising Gaza,
iv
) full Israeli security control over the Strip, and
v
) the establishment of “
an alternative civilian government that is not Hamas or the Palestinian Authority.
” The IDF is now preparing to re-take Gaza
City
, though that might first be subject to review by Israel’s full cabinet, which isn’t meeting until at least Sunday. (
NBC
)
Comment:
Israel is already
anticipating
global protests given the humanitarian crisis, and the cabinet already considered objections from its own generals, including risks to the hostages and reservist exhaustion. Meanwhile, Netanyahu told Fox that Israel plans to hand Gaza to Arab forces rather than rule Gaza itself, though principle #5 (excluding the Palestinian Authority) seems likely to irk the same Arab states who’ve long conditioned their own Gaza involvement on Ramallah having a role.
🇲🇿
Mozambique
-
They’re back.
The UN is reporting that attacks by ISIS-affiliated jihadis in Mozambique’s troubled northern Cabo Delgado province have displaced nearly 60,000 locals, while leaving an unknown number dead. (
Al Jazeera
)
Comment:
French energy giant Total is hoping to revive its $20B gas project in the area this summer, but it’s hard to see that happening, even with Rwanda deploying soldiers to help.
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
You gotta go.
President Trump has called for the immediate resignation of Intel’s newish CEO Lip-Bu Tan, labelling him “
highly conflicted
” over his investments in Chinese tech firms with reported military links. Intel’s shares dropped ~2% on the tweet. (
CNBC
)
Comment:
Tan just took the job in March, replacing Pat Gelsinger who struggled to close IBM’s yawning gap with Nvidia and others. Markets assumed Tan would ditch Gelsinger’s costly foundry strategy (making chips for others), but he’s instead doubled-down. The US government is a key IBM customer and backer, so it’s a tough look having the commander in chief call for your CEO to resign.
🇩🇪
GERMANY
-
Nevermind.
A nominee for a top court has withdrawn her candidacy after conservative lawmakers from the ruling coalition threatened to block her appointment. (
Euractiv
)
Comment
: This whole saga has been a reminder that there are still real tensions between the centre-left and centre-right within Germany’s ruling coalition.
🇸🇧
SOLOMON ISLANDS
-
Actually, you’re not invited.
Honiara has decided to exclude partner countries (including both the US and China) from its summit of Pacific leaders next month, following pressure from China to exclude Taiwan. (
Straits Times
)
Comment
: The Pacific Islands Forum (PIF) is one of the few international spaces where Taiwan still has a seat — of the 12 states still recognising Taiwan, three are in the Pacific.
🇭🇹
HAITI
-
New sheriff in town.
With gangs still controlling 90% of the capital (Port-au-Prince), Haiti’s transitional council has appointed a wealthy insurance executive as the country’s new interim leader. (
AP
)
Comment
: Until authorities can (with international help) restore order, these periodic shuffles at the top will continue to look cosmetic.
🇬🇭
GHANA
-
It can’t be.
Accra has declared three days of mourning after a chopper crash outside the capital left both the ministers of defence and environment dead. The cause is unclear. (
BBC
)
Wheels of the day
Credits: Dezo’s Garage
There was a time when ‘diplomat luxury’ and ‘Dodge wagon’ would share the same sentence in harmony. And that time, dear Intriguer, was 1979, when the US carmaker
promised
its new ‘Diplomat’ could
“be whatever you want it to be. A comfortable, elegant car. A hardworking station wagon. It’s ably qualified for both.”
We like to think it was buttoned-up enough for embassy driveways, but also roomy enough for that Costco run or happy-hour exfil. Sure, it didn’t have the glamour of a Cadillac or the swagger of a Mustang, but it showed up. And dear Intriguer, there are days as a diplomat when just showing up is half the battle.
Friday quiz
Test your knowledge on this week’s Intrigue!
1) Pop star Dua Lipa was recently awarded which citizenship?
Kosovo
United Kingdom
Lebanon
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) What's the inflation rate of Iran?
~23%
~39%
~61%
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) When will Bangladesh hold its next elections?
December 2025
February 2026
March 2027
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate