URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/why-the-uk-and-china-are-fighting-over-an-embassy
Title: 🌍 Why the UK and China are fighting over an embassy

Today’s briefing:
— The UK-China fight over an embassy
— 20 tiny pics you won’t believe
— You can do that on the Eiffel?!
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. I honed my grilling technique cooking
arrachera
(a marinated skirt steak) while on posting to Mexico, but it’s high time I diversify.
The question, dear Intriguer, is how — do I go full Japanese yakitori? Jordanian zarb? Jamaican jerk? Texan dry rub? Brazilian churrasco? Korean gogi-gul? Greek antikristo? Filipino lechon? Portuguese sardinhada? Ghanaian chichinga? Argentine asado?
It’s classic paralysis by analysis, which (sorry) might be how the UK government now feels as it agonises over whether to approve
China’s massive proposed embassy in London
.
Number of the day
~35%
That’s now TSMC’s projected annual revenue growth, revised upward from the Taiwanese chipmaker’s earlier 30% estimate amid robust AI demand.
Ambass-olutely not
The UK’s Keir Starmer won power last year with a to-do list longer than Harry Styles’s
One Direction
-era hair, but reviving the British economy was right there up the top.
So when he met China’s Xi Jinping on the sidelines of the G20 last year, sure, Starmer raised Hong Kong’s detained pro-democracy media mogul Jimmy Lai, but he swiftly also dispatched his own Chancellor of the Exchequer to Beijing with verbiage around his government’s
“commitment to explore deeper economic co-operation.”
But then the diplomats got in the way.
Okay record scratch. Not
exactly,
but embassies are involved.
It all started with
the 1648 Peace of Westphalia
Beijing’s long-planned “
mega embassy
”
on the site of the old Royal Mint, near the Tower of London. It’s a sprawling  complex that’d be 10x China’s current embassy and the biggest embassy anywhere in Europe, hence the apparent requirement for every British headline to add ‘mega’.
But the project has sat in limbo since 2022, when local officials blocked planning permission over
security and community concerns. Those
concerns
you ask?
The building drawings showed several areas “
redacted
for security reasons
”, implying some kind of intelligence asset or activity
The complex itself is
located
right above sensitive fibre-optic cables near London’s financial district (pssst, espionage)
Neighbours voiced unhappiness about all the inevitable
traffic
and protests, and
The broader public voiced unease at British
heritage
being handed over to China.
Side bar
, but it’s odd China redacted its building plans. Every country that can spy, does spy. And ordinarily you just make up a
cover-story
for whichever part of the embassy you plan to jam full of spies and listening gear:
oh, that vast, windowless, heavily fortified floor up there? Haha nothing to worry about, just the sauna!
Anyway, the local council then blocked China’s embassy plans
again
in 2024.
So the decision has now climbed all the way up to the (new) housing secretary, who’s attempting to stick to a
21 October deadline
. And he’s in
a real bind
:
China is peeved
given it paid a cool £255m for the property back in 2018, and has been burning more cash every year it’s been stuck in development purgatory. Beijing is now
arguing
the UK is breaching its obligations under the Vienna Convention (which regulates how countries treat diplomats/embassies).
And
the US is losing patience
, too: successive White Houses have warned the UK about this embassy, partly on intelligence-sharing concerns: the ‘five eyes’ (
🇦🇺
🇨🇦
🇳🇿
🇬🇧
🇺🇸
) arrangement is only as strong as its weakest link, and a vast London compound hoovering up every byte of data might weaken the UK link. But the US also realistically wants allies onboard in countering an increasingly assertive China.
Anyway, take your pick, Keir: keep the US happy, or keep China happy, though your economic recovery realistically involves figuring out how to keep them
both
happy.
And while he works on that, it’s all metastasizing into
a political problem for Starmer
on two fronts.
First
, tabloids
report
that China has periodically halted the water supply for British diplomats over in Beijing! That, together with China slow-walking its approval for the UK’s own embassy upgrade in Beijing, looks like a classic
reciprocal pressure tactic
.
But
second
, UK prosecutors also just abruptly
dropped an explosive case
against two British men both called Christopher (
Christopher
²
)
accused of spying for China, with Starmer facing claims the case collapsed after his government avoided labelling China an “
enemy
” in testimony.
The two tales combined are feeding into opposition claims that he’s ✌️weak on China✌️.
He’s sent his foreign office chief (Olly Robbins) to Beijing in an upcoming visit billed as routine, but the timing could not be worse.
Anyway, that’s how the most boring diplomatic work — embassy construction paperwork — has turned into the latest proxy front for East-West relations.
Intrigue’s Take
The UK is hardly the first country to feel caught between an accelerating US-China race. Honestly, most of the world falls into that category right now.
But this one is particularly interesting for three reasons.
First
is the fact the UK is such
a close US ally
and yet in such a tough spot economically. An ally might ordinarily ease up on those
Liberation Day
tariffs to afford the Brits a bit more breathing room on China.
Second
, it’s about
an embassy
— ie, we’re not just competing on the substance anymore, but also the
process
. It’s a reminder how all-encompassing this kind of race can be.
And
third
, if (as it says) China just wants this big embassy to help with “
promoting understanding and the friendship between the two peoples
”, it must be aware by now that this whole sorry saga is now having the exact opposite effect. But rather than course-correct, China is doubling down, and that leaves us wondering why. Sure, there’s the intel gathering and dissident monitoring. But at this stage, there’s also just testing UK resolve and Western unity.
Sound even smarter:
There are breaking reports that China-based hackers had
access to (low-medium) classified UK computer systems
for over a decade.
Earlier this year, London retook control of British Steel from its China-based owners, rushing the approval through Parliament before the owners could switch off the blast furnaces and effectively end British primary steel construction.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇻🇪
VENEZUELA
-
Trump approves CIA ops.
Building on recent maritime deployments and airstrikes billed as counternarcotic efforts, President Trump has now told reporters he’s authorised covert CIA operations — and is considering strikes — on Venezuelan territory. (
Guardian
)
Comment:
Trump’s aim — particularly publicising something that’s ordinarily covert — is clearly to put pressure on the Maduro regime, already rattled by the Nobel Peace Prize going to a pro-democracy opposition figure (Corina). What’s less clear is whether this US pressure will destabilise Maduro’s grip on power, or entrench him even further as the nation’s defender against the gringos.
🇷🇺
RUSSIA
-
Poor showing.
Putin was supposed to host his big Russia-Arab summit in Moscow yesterday (Wednesday), but instead issued a last-minute postponement after only a handful of his 22 invitees confirmed. (
Bloomberg
$)
Comment
: First, lmao. Second, this was supposed to showcase his support and influence across the Middle East, but it did the opposite as the region instead works with the US to cement the Gaza peace plan. Third, the region’s leaders will be aware that, while schlepping to Moscow would be a big gift to Putin, there’s not a whole lot Putin can offer in return while he languishes in Ukraine. Still, Putin did meet Syria’s new leader (al-Sharaa), who suggested Russia might keep its bases in Syria — we just wonder if al-Sharaa wants Putin to hand over Syria’s ex-dictator (Assad) for trial first.
🇵🇰
PAKISTAN
-
Ceasefire.
Pakistan has agreed to a 48-hour ceasefire with neighbouring Afghanistan after their deadliest border clashes in years. Most crossings remain closed. (
Al Jazeera
)
Comment
: We wrote about the
sudden escalation
on Monday.
🇰🇭
CAMBODIA
-
Scammy business.
British and US authorities have seized $15B in bitcoin and sanctioned Cambodian conglomerate Prince Group and its founder, Chen Zhi, alleging he was running “
one of the largest investment fraud operations in history.
” (
Independent
)
Comment
: Phnom Penh (ruled by the Hun political dynasty) has been a little defensive if cautious in its comments about this case: that aligns with reports it enjoys close ties with the Prince Group, but is wary of running afoul of the US and UK.
🇦🇷
ARGENTINA
-
Strings attached.
President Trump has suggested his administration’s $20B financial lifeline for Buenos Aires could be contingent on political ally and Argentine counterpart, Javier Milei, doing well at next weekend’s mid-term elections. (
BA Times
)
Comment
: The US president denies trying to help Milei at the ballot box, but his blunt framing could still have the opposite effect. Currency markets certainly shuddered.
🇰🇪
KENYA
-
Legendary politician dies.
Former PM, perennial presidential candidate, and influential statesman Raila Odinga (80) has died of a heart attack during a trip to India. He’d recently signed a pact to bring his opposition party into a kind of unity government with Kenya’s embattled president, William Ruto. (
Africa News
)
Extra Intrigue
In other worlds…
Tech:
Waymo is planning to launch its famous
self-driving taxis in London
next year.
Tech (again):
X
has announced it’s trialling
additional profile information
(including a user’s country) to help folks verify account authenticity.
Science:
Check out the top 20 photos from this year’s
Nikon Small World photomicrography
competition.
Record of the day
As people whose job is literally “
internet
”, we see our fair share of wild tales.
But we were still surprised when TikTok star and cyclist Aurélien Fontenoy broke the record for fastest bike ride to the top of the Eiffel Tower. To be clear: it’s 686
steps
, so he had to bunny-hop the whole way, and he did so in just 12 minutes and 30 seconds.
We haven’t seen such an arduous ascent since a non-nepo-baby career diplomat made ambassador.
Today’s poll
Do you think the UK should approve China's mega embassy in London?
🏛️ Yes, the UK needs better ties with China
👎 No, the risks outweigh any benefits
✍️ Other (write us!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think outlets should be able to report on national security leaks?
⛔ No way, leaks could harm national security (20%)
🖋️ Yep, the press must be free (79%)
✍️ Other (write in!)  (1%)
Your two cents:
🖋️
J.P.S:
“It's the government's responsibility to prevent national security leaks, and the media's job to report when the government is doing it badly.”
⛔
T.S:
“Loose lips sink ships.”
🖋️
A.D:
“In its own backwards way, leaks make the system safer and more secure.”
✍️
R.I:
“Reporting on classified material related to an upcoming attack or on undercover agents can cause harm. But avoiding reporting on classified material at all can also enable fraud.”