URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/why-china-s-stocks-are-so-hot-right-now-6ab4fc1de03e48ea
Title: 🌍 Why China’s stocks are so hot right now

Today’s briefing:
— Why China’s stocks are so hot right now
— A massive solar boom where?
— An unexpected mascot
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Here at Intrigue HQ, we pride ourselves on delivering the most important and intriguing news of the day. We spotlight the hard-hitting stories, like yesterday’s announcement that Taylor Swift and Travis Kelce (aka your fave English and Gym teachers) are finally engaged.
While your newsfeeds were busy pushing you endless Swiftie content, you’ll likely have missed other important happenings globally — like our top story today on
the surging Chinese stock market
. Good thing we’ve got Intrigue to take you into the long weekend here in the US and bid goodbye to an eventful summer
☀
.
PS
— This is
our last briefing for the week
, but we’ll be back from Monday!
Number of the day
60%
That’s how much Africa’s solar panel imports have increased over the past year, with massive jumps in Algeria (33x), Zambia (8x) and Botswana (7x). That’s according to energy thinktank Ember, which
assesses
Africa might now be poised for solar take-off.
Bubble Tea, Chips, and AI Dreams
China’s equities are so hot right now. How hot? So hot.
Shares have added nearly a trillion dollars in value in just the past month, and
China’s key CSI 300 index is up 15% just in August alone, to a decade high.
So let’s take a quick look at why:
Government backing.
We’ve shared a few updates on the Party’s repeated efforts to revive China’s economy. And while the fundamentals are still lagging, market
sentiment
is now enjoying a bump.
One clear example is in China’s slow-motion property collapse, which has shrugged off most government stimulus to date, and yet real estate shares are now surging.
Why?
a
) Premier Li just used a
cabinet
meeting to (again) pledge a halt to the decline
b
) The cities of Shanghai and Beijing just eased more home-buying
rules
, and
c
) There’s speculation there’ll be more support ahead to keep the good headlines rolling for next week’s big WWII
“Victory Day”
parade
(with guests like Putin).
That’s all raised
hopes
maybe China’s real estate slump has finally hit the bottom. But the question is (again) whether those hopes are well-founded, particularly as estimates still do the rounds warning of tens of millions of empty, unsold dwellings.
Meanwhile, an apparent
end to the government’s crackdown
on the tech sector has contributed to local market euphoria around…
AI.
There are several interesting drivers here:
a
) Big international
events
such as the first World Humanoid Robot Games and Shanghai’s big global AI conference (attended by Intrigue) have shone a light on the many legit advances now playing out in China’s tech sector, like…
b
) Local
startups
such as
Z.ai
now claim better models than even famed local rival DeepSeek, which in turn just released its own update to the model that first shocked the world back in January. DeepSeek says it’s now optimising for…
c
) “
Soon-to-be-released next-generation
domestic chips
” — US export curbs have complicated China’s chip ambitions, but DeepSeek is signalling optimism. That, plus Beijing’s warnings against US chips, has all helped local alternatives surge.
And of course, who fills China’s euphoric tech world…?
Gen Z.
References to those screen-obsessed Gen-Z types can seem a bit glib, but in China we’re talking about
a quarter of a billion people
! And contrary to their parents, local Gen Zers spend much more than their ~17% population share would suggest.
They also spend that cash differently, with recent surveys suggesting they prioritise what a Fudan thinktank has dubbed ‘
emotional consumption
’. What’s that?
Current share rallies point the way, with firms like…
Pop Mart
(maker of the iconic Labubu dolls) announcing a massive 400% profit bump to overtake JD.com’s market cap at $55B
Homegrown viral luxury jewellery brand
Laopu
up 211% this year, and…
No Gen Z can finish the day without a hit of bubble (boba) tea, making Yun'an Wang a billionaire by listing his
Guming
empire earlier this year.
Though of course, there are ‘buts’ at play, too: like the anecdotal evidence of more youth falling into debt spirals. And meanwhile, the sheer force of this bull run has now nudged some big players to start imposing trading limits, suggesting fears of a correction ahead.
Intrigue’s Take
We’ve focused on some of the drivers
within
China, but of course a big one comes from abroad: this local market sentiment probably also reflects a belief that
President Trump’s trade crackdown on China
won’t be as sharp as first feared.
We’ve previously looked at
the reasons
, including earlier US market freak-outs, China’s leverage over inputs like rare earths, continued truce extensions, and a pattern of other US deals suggesting maybe there’s a grand bargain China’s economy can absorb.
And a Trump-Xi meeting around Korea’s APEC summit in late Oct/early Nov seems the natural time and place to announce that kind of deal. But if that’s the case, it doesn’t leave much time to meaningfully address the big underlying US-China economic imbalances. If we instead see more of
a splashy deal
(pledges to buy more soybeans and Boeings), while otherwise extending the status quo, China’s stocks could be in for another run.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
The Hustle
There's a breezy, 5-minute morning read that keeps you sharp on everything business and tech without overwhelming your schedule. The Hustle covers stories that matter to consumers and professionals alike, expertly summarizing the fascinating rabbit holes you don't have time to sift through yourself. With over 2 million people getting this daily dose of essential intel in their inbox, you'll stay informed while actually having some fun with your news consumption. Don't miss out on what's become the go-to source for busy professionals who want substance without the fluff.
Subscribe and see what the buzz is about.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇮🇳
INDIA
-
Tariffs take effect.
President Trump has delivered on his threats to impose punitive tariffs on India for buying Russian oil, with a 50% US tariff now hitting most Indian goods. (
Indian Express
)
🇦🇹
AUSTRIA
-
We got you.
It turns out Austria’s elite ‘Cobra’ security service unit has been providing round-the-clock protection to the Argentine diplomat (Rafael Grossi) running the UN’s Vienna-based nuclear watchdog after a specific Iranian threat against him. (
WSJ
$)
Comment:
The possibility of a threat is unsurprising given the open calls in Iranian media for Grossi’s execution (Tehran blamed his enrichment whistle-blowing for sparking Israel’s 12-day war). The more surprising thing for us is that Grossi didn’t have security already (it’s a notoriously high-stakes gig).
🇹🇼
TAIWAN
-
No nuclear.
A referendum to reopen Taiwan’s last nuclear power plant has failed to reach the necessary threshold (a quarter of all registered electors), despite a clear majority backing the idea. It’s raising energy security concerns, given Taiwan now imports around 98% of its energy (mostly natural gas and coal). (
NucNet
)
🇷🇺
RUSSIA
-
Hit the gas.
Russia’s headlines have focused on a gasoline shortage this week, as higher seasonal demand and repeated Ukrainian strikes on energy infrastructure lead to near-record prices and lengthy gas station queues in some regions. Moscow is hoping measures like its new gasoline export ban will help. (
BBC’s Steve Rosenberg
)
Comment:
Of course, local editors are cautious not to flag the root cause: Putin’s decision to invade his neighbour. Shortages could be manageable for Putin so long as he can avoid them touching the urban elite in Moscow and St Petersburg.
🇧🇩
BANGLADESH
-
No more funds.
Interim leader Muhammad Yunus has warned his country can’t afford more aid for the growing number of Rohingya now seeking local refuge from Myanmar’s civil war next door. (
Arab News
)
Comment:
The number of folks fleeing Myanmar has surged just as international aid dries up — the world’s latest humanitarian crisis response is only ~36% funded.
🇧🇷
BRAZIL
-
Downgraded.
Israel has downgraded ties with Brazil, withdrawing its request to appoint a new ambassador after lengthy delays in Brasilia’s formal approval. (
Times of Israel
)
Comment:
A lengthy and unexplained delay is a common foreign ministry way of saying no without saying no — the result is Israel’s representation now matches that of Brazil, which withdrew its own ambassador to Israel last year in protest over Gaza.
🇧🇼
BOTSWANA
-
No more medicine.
President Boko has announced a public health emergency after hospitals ran out of certain meds due to reported supply chain issues. He’s ordered the military to oversee emergency distribution drives. (
The Guardian
)
Comment
: This is all complicated by the fact that the global diamond sector (accounting for ~25% of Botswana’s GDP) has been in structural decline.
Extra Intrigue
Meanwhile, in other worlds:
Science
: Astronomers have just
discovered another moon
orbiting (ahem) Uranus, bringing the total to 29.
Art
: An
artwork looted by Nazis
has been found in Argentina thanks to a real estate listing.
Sports
: Spain’s tennis darling Carlos Alcaraz has stepped onto the
court with a newly shaved head
after his brother’s hands slipped while trimming his locks.
From our sponsors
Use Summer to Slow Down and Check In With Yourself.
Summer can offer a much-needed pause. If you're feeling disconnected, therapy is a powerful way to reflect and reset.  BetterHelp makes it easy to connect with a therapist who understands burnout and high-pressure environments. You can talk to a licensed therapist from anywhere—even poolside or between flights.
For a limited time, new users
get 25% off the first month.
Take the First Step Back to Balance
Mascot of the day
Military regiments have long adopted animal mascots to boost wartime morale or just zhuzh up peacetime parades. But no one takes it quite as seriously as the Royal Welsh, whose goat is technically a ranking member of the regiment rather than a mere mascot.
Famously, the regiment once demoted Lance Corporal William ‘Billy’ Windsor after he tried to headbutt the drummers during Queen Elizabeth’s 80th birthday celebrations. Billy eventually regained his rank thanks to a redeeming performance at a subsequent parade.
Extra fun fact:
Billy apparently even got two cigarettes a day, though we’re told he’d eat rather than smoke them.
Today’s poll
What Chinese stock would you buy?
🎎 Pop Mart
💻 DeepSeek
🍪 Hua Hong Semiconductor
🏪 JD.Com
🔱 Laopu Gold
✍️ Other (write us!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think President Trump can broker peace on the Korean Peninsula?
☮️ Yes, he's one of the few leaders on speaking terms with both North and South (10%)
🎭
No, it's just for show (88%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (2%)
Your two cents:
🎭
H.L:
“Trump may like to think he’s a deal maker but his track record shows otherwise.”
☮️
G.V.P:
“US influence in the South is enormous. Trump has had contact with the North, which is more than most other Western countries.”
✍️
R.D.F:
“Peace would require a DPRK regime that wanted peace. Kim doesn't. Though he will surely take the opportunity to grab headlines that a meeting with Trump would offer.”