URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/why-xi-just-banned-boozy-lunches-4d33367d82d2ffc7
Title: 🌍 Why Xi just banned boozy lunches

Today’s briefing:
— Why Xi just banned boozy lunches
— The Intrigue jobs board
— A ‘VFG’ meme
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Chinese President Xi’s first anti-corruption drive back in the early 2010s had the tagline of cracking down on “
tigers and flies
”. It was meant to signal to the Chinese system that no one would be spared, whether high-level officials or local civil servants.
Spates of this anti-corruption drive would continue over the next decade, spanning from top banking folks to those working in China’s elite nuclear rocket force. To some, the anti-corruption agenda has become a central plank of Xi’s legacy.
Fast forward to 2025, and
the latest targets of Xi's anti-corruption drive
are... banquets and floral arrangements. It seems that no one can dodge the purge.
PS - Wanna
win one of 24 signed copies of
In Praise of Idleness
,
the acclaimed take on Bertrand Russell’s timeless essay from international best-selling humourist and fellow Intriguer,
Bradley Trevor Greive
? To go in the draw, simply share Intrigue with a couple of friends this month using your unique referral link down the bottom of today’s briefing!
Appointment of the day
5.30pm
That’s when South Africa’s Cyril Ramaphosa is due to meet President Trump at the White House later today (Wednesday), after months of trading barbs around racial discrimination, refugee policy, and beyond.
No Xi-nanigans!
Ain’t no party like a Communist Party. Or at least, that was the case until Monday?
According to 20 new austerity guidelines just
dropped
(
🇨🇳
) by China’s State Council (cabinet), “
waste is shameful and economy is glorious
”. So China’s officials will again now have to cut down on several budget items, including all those:
Fancy meals
Lavish flower arrangements
Fabulous send-off ceremonies, and
Training programs that look a teeeeensy bit like group tours.
This isn’t exactly news for party members. Beijing issued the first such guidelines in 2013 shortly after Xi Jinping rose to power. But this is the first solid update in years.
So, why is Xi cracking down again now?
His stated reasons mention declining land sale revenues and mounting local government debt, though it’s hard to see how cutting down on a few
Zhonghua cigarettes and peony arrangements might dent the estimated $7-10 trillion in local government obligations.
So here are three other reasons:
A stormy economic outlook
China’s president has taken a
defiant yet sober
tone, warning of “
difficulties and obstacles
” ahead, and flagging China will have to “
adjust and optimise its economic structure
” to face a changing world.
That’s partly because, even with US tariffs slashed back to (a still hefty) 30%, he’s grappling with
headwinds
across deflation, demographics, and a property collapse.
And while trimming a bit of official excess won’t make a meaningful
economic
difference to the
real estate bubble
exhaling an estimated $18 trillion, it does send a
political
signal that Xi’s sober message is for everyone. Otherwise, there’s the risk of discontent bubbling up through the gaps and eroding the party’s legitimacy, which leads us to…
Xi’s anti-corruption drive
Xi first launched his austerity guidelines back in 2013, and that timing is significant for reasons beyond the fact he’d just taken power:
Eg, it was shortly after
Bloomberg
and
The New York Times
published
spicy exposés
about the extended family wealth surrounding Xi and other top cadres.
So he had
political incentives
to push back not only on that personal image problem, but also on the party’s broader image problem given the scale of some of the graft emerging (like the railway minister who amassed 19 mistresses and 374 houses).
But now that authorities have
jailed more than a
million
officials
on corruption grounds, there’s growing suspicion many are getting swept up in a broader
political
purge, which leads us to...
Party discipline
Related to the first two reasons, but this renewed austerity drive is probably also another attempt to impose discipline across
the party’s 100 million members
—
a la
New York’s broken window theory, focus on the little things (whether a broken window or a four-hour power-lunch), and folks might think twice about pulling any bigger stunts.
It becomes
an exercise in authority
for the party’s top honchos, without having to do much heavy lifting.
Intrigue’s Take
Years ago, Mexico had a colourful cabinet minister called Salvador Vega Casillas who popularised
a ‘toll booth’ theory
of corruption, arguing graft thrives wherever the state imposes needless bureaucratic ‘toll booths’ — each ‘booth’ just creates an opportunity for a corrupt official to demand bribes from folks trying to navigate the system.
So he launched a public competition called
El Trámite Más Inútil
(
The Most Useless Procedure
), inviting citizens to nominate the worst red-tape for their chance to win a cash prize. The result was stunning — they got 30,000 entries, helping guide their subsequent deregulation and anti-corruption drive (the winner was a single mother who had to jump through monthly bureaucratic hurdles to get medication for her young child).
We mention this example because
a)
China’s state-heavy economy has its own toll booth problem, but
b)
it’s also a reminder of the risks ahead as more governments across the West go a little more state-heavy on national security and/or industrial policy grounds, introducing big new toll booths that are making massive, multi-billion dollar decisions.
Sound even smarter:
Back in 2016, China’s Anhui province banned booze during work events after several officials actually died of alcohol poisoning from state banquets.
Intrigue presents…
How do democracies win against united rivals?
Join International Intrigue and
Pulitzer Prize winner Anne Applebaum
for a candid chat on her latest book, ‘Autocracy Inc.’.  We will dive into the strategies and tactics of modern autocrats, their interconnected networks for spreading disinformation, and the global fight for democracies to push back against this tide.
Register now!
(oh, and don’t miss
our chat with Fareed Zakaria
on May 28!)
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇬🇧
UNITED KINGDOM
-
UK and EU scrutinise trade ties with Israel over Gaza.
The UK has halted its Israel trade talks and imposed targeted settler sanctions, while the EU has now pledged to review its own trade agreement with Israel, as the IDF presses on with its stated plan to seize Gaza and fully defeat Hamas. (
Independent
)
🇸🇾
SYRIA
-
Rubio warns of another Syrian civil war.
The US secretary of state has told Congress that Syria could be just weeks away from collapsing into another full-scale civil war if DC doesn’t support the transitional government. He made the comments while defending President Trump’s decision to lift sanctions, a move now echoed by the EU. (
France 24
)
Comment:
It’s hard to know how much of this was political rhetoric, but Syria’s recent bouts of sectarian violence are a reminder of the jihadi worldview still permeating some of the country’s ruling factions, plus the level of distrust among Syria’s various communities (long exploited by the Assad family to perpetuate their own rule).
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
Beijing to send an additional $500M to the WHO.
Beijing has announced it’ll back the World Health Organisation with an additional $500M over the next five years, making China the body’s top donor now that the US has withdrawn. (
Straits Times
)
Comment
: It’s a reminder of the dilemma for the US — sure, register your anger by ditching a flawed international body, but do so with the knowledge that your influence over that body then drops to zero, leaving a vacuum for any rivals.
🇩🇪
GERMANY
-
Berlin’s industrial plan clashing with EU law?
A leaked memo in the German business daily Handesblatt suggests the country’s economy ministry is increasingly concerned Brussels might block its plan to grant electricity subsidies for energy-intensive industries. (
Politico
)
Comment
: Chancellor Merz already had a bumpy landing after his shock Bundestag (non)confirmation vote, and these kinds of EU roadblocks (notwithstanding any valid objectives) will inevitably embolden Eurosceptic opposition parties like the AfD.
🇻🇳
VIETNAM
-
Infamous ‘Napalm Girl’ photo credits in doubt.
The annual ‘World Press Photo Contest’ has suspended its attribution for the winning ‘Napalm Girl’ Vietnam War photo of 1973, citing evidence popularised in a recent Sundance documentary that the pic might not’ve been by an AP photographer, but instead a local freelancer called Nguyen Thanh Nghe. (
CNN
)
🇲🇽
MEXICO
-
Personal secretary to Mexico City mayor assassinated.
Someone has gunned down two of the Mexico City mayor’s team in broad daylight, in what her office is describing as a “
direct attack
”. This kind of hit is pretty rare in the capital city, which has a lower homicide rate than (say) DC. (
Guardian
)
🇹🇷
TURKEY
-
Ankara forecasts “
huge
” peace dividend from PKK dissolution.
Turkey’s finance minister says his country has lost $1.8T (including opportunity costs) fighting Kurdish groups over the decades, meaning a massive windfall if the PKK’s dissolution releases state spending for other priorities. (
Bloomberg
$)
Extra Intrigue
The Intrigue jobs board
💼
Social secretary to the ambassador
@
German embassy
in DC
NATO internship programme
@
NATO
in Brussels
Industry affairs
@
International Air Transport Association
in Sydney
Producer
@
Reuters
in Mexico City
Meme of the day
Courtesy of our meme-lord @DickerPicss via Insta
She started out as an FSO in the MFA and eventually made DCM, but got put on DCL after a TDY at UNGA where her COM forgot to clear a TPN through EAD before NPT.
Translation
: She started out as a diplomat in the foreign ministry and eventually made deputy ambassador, but then got put on stress leave after a short-term assignment at UN leaders week because her ambassador forgot to clear a diplomatic note through the foreign ministry’s East Asia Division ahead of the non-proliferation treaty summit.
Translation of the translation
: She was having a dream run until her boss messed up and threw her under the bus.
Today’s poll
What do you think Xi's latest austerity guidelines are *mostly* about?
🔨 Party discipline
📈 Budget austerity
💸 Anti-corruption
⚡ Popular legitimacy
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think the US should ease chip rules on China?
💽
Yes, restrictions will just end up harming the US (53%)
🙅
No, they're rivals (45%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (2%)
Your two cents:
💽
K.K:
“Necessity is the mother of invention. No necessity, no invention!”
🙅
M.A:
“The idea that restrictions will just make China become self-sufficient forgets that it seeks to become self-sufficient regardless of restrictions, and giving Beijing access will just make it easier to reverse engineer and become autonomous quicker.”
✍️
R.C.O:
“Tough question, but probably ease the sale of chips while keeping the limits on chip manufacturing equipment and software. China will get chips one way or another, but getting ASML gear for 2nm nodes is much tougher.”