URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/why-uganda-is-having-a-meltdown-about-germany-s-ambassador-76703d2f7122a40e
Title: 🌍 Why Uganda is having a meltdown about Germany's ambassador

Today’s briefing:
— Why a German ambassador is in deep do-do
— Did a 1990s comic just crash Japan’s tourism?
— A very lucky Norwegian
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Sometimes you just need some non-sequitur humour, so here are three of my favourite social media accounts delivering exactly that:
La gente que está detrás
(the people behind) zooms into the folks standing behind politicians in pics, curating a kaleidoscope of bored and bewildered expressions
People selling mirrors
features, yes, people going to amusing lengths (or none at all) to avoid appearing in their own pics when trying to sell a mirror online, and
Actual names
scours old census data to find, well, actual names that’ll give you a chuckle, whether it’s folks called Honest Winker or Flaming Gooch.
Anyway, with that palate-cleanser done, let’s get you up to speed on the very intriguing question of why
Uganda’s military just cut ties with Germany
!
PS
- Don’t forget to share Intrigue this month using your unique referral link down below for your chance to
win one of 24 signed copies
of the must-have classic,
In Praise of Idleness,
by fellow Intriguer and international best-selling writer,
Bradley Trevor Greive
!
Un-diplomatic
General Kainerugaba and Ambassador Schauer
Uganda's military
announced
on Sunday it's cutting all ties with Germany!
Why?
Officially
, it was "
in response to credible intelligence reports that the current German Ambassador to Uganda His Excellency
Mathias Schauer
is actively engaged in subversive activities
".
Now, that is an
incredibly spicy
allegation to make against a foreign ambassador. In fact, we'd go so far as to liken it to the Merciless Pepper of Quetzlzacatenango.
So
what exactly did ol' Mathias get up to?
Well, the generals won't say, though the head of the armed forces (and the president’s son / heir) later
argued
it's not a Germany thing. Rather, "
it has to do with him as a person. He is wholly unqualified to be in Uganda.
"
Unqualified
. Did he forget to do his annual mandatory online training?
Nope. Rather, we can triangulate the ambassador’s sin from a few clues:
Earlier this month, he (and other EU ambassadors) met Uganda's
beleaguered opposition
, now led by pop-star-turned-politician Bobi Wine. That’s kinda normal. But it's spicy in Uganda's authoritarian context, and the president's son / top general later warned that the ambassadors were "
playing with fire
"
The same day, the EU ambassador reportedly called out Uganda's
pattern of arrests and torture of opposition figures
ahead of next year's elections, and
Then just on Friday, those two ambassadors met another top general (Saleh, the
president’s brother
— see a pattern here?), to push back on the presidential son’s fiery tweets against ambassadors.
And it was against that backdrop that the military announced it was cutting all ties with Germany, citing those allegations spicier than a chilli grown deep in the jungle by inmates of an insane asylum (sorry, another Simpsons reference).
So, what's going on?
The president's son and others have tried to frame it all as…
Anti-colonialism
, pushing back on Europeans disrespecting locals, and
National security
, alleging foreign-backed plots to destabilise the country.
It's also worth noting the president’s son / general (Kainerugaba) is what you might call a “
loose unit
” — he famously offered 100 cows as a bride price for Italian leader Giorgia Meloni (widely seen as a stunt, but it got him suspended by his dad).
Meanwhile,
Germany is holding its tongue
beyond rejecting the allegations as absurd, but the Germans are probably saying something like this behind the embassy gates:
This is
a familiar pattern
, with the regime raising the spectre of a foreign-backed insurgency in the months before each election to justify targeting the opposition, criminalising dissent, and/or distracting from any domestic failings
By
calling-out an individual ambassador
and circulating details of his private meeting, the regime is creating a pretext to declare his position untenable, and
This all
sends a signal to every other ambassador
in town: speak up this election cycle, or even be seen around the president's murky succession dynamics (Friday’s meeting with his brother), and you'll be next.
Intrigue’s Take
So... who cares?
There are a few reasons why it’s worth caring.
First
, if a foreign ambassador isn't safe in
Uganda
, then who is? Certainly not opposition voices, but as the net of alleged ‘foreign interference’ gets wider, it'll rattle investors and tourists, too — both critical drivers for the country's broader prosperity.
Second
, it's part of a broader trend in
East Africa
. Just in the past week, someone abducted yet another Kenyan opposition figure, while disturbing details have emerged about Tanzania's treatment of supporters who tried to attend the opposition leader’s trial on bogus treason charges (both governments deny any role).
And
third
, it's arguably part of a trend
everywhere
: paranoid authorities bristling at outside scrutiny, and sensing a distracted or diluted international community, now seem emboldened to steamroll any individual, business, or organisation who gets in their way.
Sound even smarter:
It’s unclear how much military cooperation Germany actually has with Uganda, though the president's son has told local outlets it includes "
intelligence, training, Somalia
" (the latter being a reference to Uganda's participation in the African Union mission in Somalia, backed by the EU).
The son seems to have just tweeted (then deleted) an apology to his uncle (General Saleh) that also pledged to halt online jabs at European diplomats.
🤷
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
Growth School
Learn Million Dollar AI Strategies & Tools in this 3 hour AI Workshop. Join now for $0
Everyone tells you to learn AI but no one tells you where.
Growthschool is bringing this ChatGPT & AI Workshop to our readers. It is usually $199, but free for you because you are our loyal readers
🎁
This workshop has been taken by
1 Million people
across the globe, who have been able to:
Build business that make $10,000 by just using AI tools
Make quick & smarter decisions using AI-led data insights
Write emails, content & more in seconds using AI
Solve complex problems, research 10x faster & save 16 hours every week
You’ll wish you knew about this FREE AI Training sooner (Btw, it’s rated at 9.8/10 ⭐)
Save your seat for $0 now! (Valid for 100 people only)
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇷🇺
RUSSIA
-
Trump calls Putin “
absolutely CRAZY
”.
Moscow has dismissed President Trump as “
emotional
” after the US president criticised Putin’s biggest-yet aerial attack on Ukrainian cities. Meanwhile, German Chancellor Friedrich Merz has confirmed Kyiv’s European allies have now removed all range restrictions on military aid to Ukraine, though it’s unclear if that means he’ll now uphold his election pledge to share Germany’s famed ‘Taurus’ missile. (
BBC
)
🇪🇺
EUROPEAN UNION
-
US to delay EU tariffs ‘till July.
48 hours after first announcing them, President Trump announced on Sunday he’ll now pause his 50% tariffs on EU goods until 9 July to allow more time for talks, following a call with his EU counterpart Ursula von der Leyen. (
CNBC
)
Comment:
von der Leyen says her bloc is ready to act “
swiftly and decisively
”, though that doesn’t necessarily mean substantively. The UK-US mini-deal suggests the hurdle for the White House to declare victory might be fairly attainable, and likely includes measures to box out China-based supply chains.
🇻🇳
VIETNAM
-
Paris and Hanoi sign Airbus deal during Macron visit.
The deal for 20 Airbus jets was one of several agreements President Macron signed during his first visit to Vietnam in a decade. (
Straits Times
)
Comment
: As Macron continues to pour effort into France’s international standing, we wonder to what extent it’s to distract from his low approvals at home, versus him sensing an opportunity to fill any perceived US vacuum abroad. Perhaps both.
🇯🇵
JAPAN
-
Did a 1990s comic book just crash tourism?
Some flight bookings into Japan for late June / early July have dropped by up to 80%, with travel agencies blaming a 1999 Japanese graphic novel which famously warned of a “
great disaster
” in March 2011 (when Fukushima then hit). The newly updated work also warned in 2021 of a disaster hitting Japan on 5 July 2025, though the author is urging folks not to take her predictions literally. (
Guardian
)
🇮🇷
Iran
-
The mullahs go green.
Tehran is now allocating $1.5B for solar panel installations, in an effort to diversify the country’s energy mix as it continues to grapple with shortages. (
Energetica
)
🇸🇷
SURINAME
-
Elections neck-and-neck in oil boom race.
The two main parties are now in rival talks with smaller players to secure a majority after Sunday’s elections produced a hung parliament. Suriname is among the poorest countries in the Americas, with massive recent oil discoveries dominating this election campaign. (
France 24
)
Extra Intrigue
🤣
Your roundup of the world’s lighter news
One lucky Norwegian man has woken to find a huge containership
run aground in his backyard
, narrowly missing his house.
The French town of Landerneau has broken a record after
3,000 folks in Smurf
costumes gathered there. Weird but impressive (though no sign of Gargamel).
A lost DoorDash driver has somehow ended up roaming around the
secure area of Chicago’s O’Hare airport
for miles, potentially even crossing runways.
The world’s top chess grandmaster is playing a single
game against 140,000 people
, and thinks the match might be headed for a draw.
And it turns out the
Magna Carta
copy Harvard
purchased for $27.50
back in 1946 is actually the real thing from the 1300s, worth well into the millions.
From our sponsors
Travel Smarter by Speaking the Language.
Spring adventures are better when you can talk to the locals. With Babbel, you’ll learn real-world phrases, practical conversation skills, and cultural tips—so you can travel with confidence and make every moment count.
From Parisian cafés to Tokyo night markets, be the traveler who connects—not just the one who points at menus. Just 10 minutes a day is all it takes.
Get 65% Off
Intrigue presents
Millions listen to him every day. Now he gets to listen to you.
We’ll be chatting with legendary CNN journalist, author, and global affairs commentator
Fareed Zakaria
on the evolving media landscape and how societies respond in times of political, social, and economic change, online tomorrow (Wed 28 May).
Sign up here!
Today’s poll
Do you think being an ambassador is riskier now than it was 20 years ago?
⚡ Yes
📉 No
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Thursday’s poll:
Do you think geopolitics is the single biggest risk to banks today?
🌍 Yes, it shapes everything else (81%)
🤔
No, because... (write in!) (19%)
Your two cents:
🌍
I.B:
“The fact that Wall Street newsletters can't stop talking geopolitics is very telling.”
🤔
S.F:
“All politics is local. Same with banking. The three Cs rule lending: character, collateral, and capacity.”
🤔
M.P:
“You can't really manage geopolitical risk, beyond avoiding multipolar targets and creaky supply chains. Unless a bank is too big to fail they should be primarily focused on credit risk and cyber-crime risk.”