URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/will-lebanon-finally-get-a-president
Title: 🌏 Will Lebanon finally get a president?

IN TODAY’S EDITION
1️⃣ Will Lebanon finally get a president?
2️⃣ Diplomats on the move
3️⃣ Meme of the day
Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
Before we jump into today’s top story on Lebanon’s likely new president, it’s important to get ourselves familiarised with a couple of terms that describe the country’s political setup.
The first is ‘confessionals’, which refers to a system of government that’s a blend of religion and politics. It usually involves proportionately distributing power among religious communities.
The second is ‘consociationalism’ (say that quickly three times). This refers to a state which has major internal divisions among ethnic, religious, or sociolinguistic lines, but remains stable due to consultative power-sharing between the groups.
As Lebanon has seen, this last concept is often easier realised in theory than in practice.
THE HEADLINES
Biden declares state of emergency over fires.
California’s wildfires, burning since Tuesday, have now left at least five dead, neighbourhoods destroyed, and
100,000+ residents evacuated
. The ongoing emergency response includes firefighting planes sent each year by Canada’s Quebec province.
China still struggling with deflation.
The consumer inflation rate hit its
lowest point in nine months
in December, its fourth consecutive monthly decline, as doubts persist around Beijing’s willingness or ability to stimulate the economy out of its current rut.
Venezuelan opposition calls for mass protests today.
The opposition has
called on Venezuelans to take to the streets
today (Thursday), as the Maduro regime ramps up security ahead of his purported re-inauguration tomorrow. Meanwhile the actual winner (ex-diplomat Edmundo González) is in Panama, transferring custody of Venezuela’s ballot tallies for safe-keeping in Panama’s central bank vault.
Global government bonds jump at sudden selloff.
The yields of US, UK, German, and Japanese
10-year bonds jumped yesterday
as jittery investors sold off their government bonds (yields rise when bond prices fall). While there was no obvious trigger, investors have signalled unease at high debt levels and uncertainty linked to Trump 2.0.
A virtual briefing with Congressman Raja Krishnamoorthi
Ever wondered what’s really driving US-China competition? Here’s your chance to get the inside scoop from someone who’s actually in the room. Join us for a candid conversation with Congressman Raja Krishnamoorthi, Ranking Member of the Select Committee on the Strategic Competition Between the United States and the Chinese Communist Party and member of the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence.
REGISTER NOW
TOP STORY
Will Lebanon finally get a president?
In politics, you gotta keep your record squeaky-clean. Stole a kid’s chocolate milk in first grade? You’re out. Sent a silly tweet in 2010? Don’t even think about it.
It’s tough
anywhere
, but in Lebanon, picking a president is tougher. So tough, in fact, that Lebanese lawmakers have tried and failed to pick a president
12 times
since October 2022.
Enter
General Joseph Aoun
,
who’s led the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) since 2017, and who’s now gearing up to swap his fatigues for a presidential sash. The constitution bars military brass from holding the presidency, meaning Aoun needs to wriggle through the loophole of a two-thirds vote in the legislature (that’s 86 votes).
But first, if you’re wondering what’s so special about Aoun, some would say he’s simply mastered the art of blooming where planted.
Consider the past 17 months
—
the once-dominant Hezbollah’s influence has waned as Israel has 1) decimated its leadership
all the way to the top
, 2) compromised its command and logistics via
pager attacks
, and 3) forced it into a ceasefire that includes
withdrawing from Israel’s border
(as demanded by the UN Security Council in 2006).
And things just got worse for the Iran-backed group last month when Syria’s Assad fled to Moscow, effectively severing Tehran’s supply routes to Hezbollah — there are fears Iranian diplomats are now trying to help Hezbollah by
abusing
diplomatic immunity instead.
Anyway, beaten back by Israel and semi-abandoned by Iran, Hezbollah — once unthinkably opposed to Aoun — is now potentially too weak to block him. A top Hezbollah official emerged briefly from hiding to confirm it wouldn’t (or couldn’t).
Now, consider the past few weeks
— it’s been a rush of players trying to fill the vacuum:
US
Envoy Amos Hochstein
🇺🇸
was
pictured meeting Aoun
, ostensibly to discuss ceasefire arrangements, but the agenda must’ve included politics
France
’s Jean-Yves Le Drian
🇫🇷
then
showed up in Beirut
, where
🇪🇬
Egypt
’s FM was also
making phone calls
— both seemingly gunning for Aoun
And the
🇸🇦
Saudi
envoy has made two trips there in five days
, less than a month after hosting the army chief back in the kingdom.
Together with the
Qataris
, who
grabbed their selfie
with Aoun last month, these players make up the ‘Quintet’ who’ve been working to help broker consensus around a new president.
Iran is
milking
that foreign role to foster more local resentment, though Aoun makes sense for many locals because he can a) control the LAF, which now needs to stabilise Lebanon, and b) the LAF has long been
backed by Washington
to help squeeze out Hezbollah, making Aoun a known entity for some of the world’s richest countries who’ll be needed for reconstruction (the Quintet members are variously US allies).
And finally, consider the past 24 hours
—
Hezbollah's favoured candidate for the presidency just dropped out and endorsed Aoun, whose path to victory is now much clearer.
So there are no guarantees in Lebanese politics, and Aoun just got 71 votes in the first round a few minutes ago (short of the 86 he needs). But the word we’re getting is he’s still likely to emerge as president later today.
And that’s when the hard part really starts: seeking international investment to rebuild Lebanon, while his
central banker
sits in jail.
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
A few weeks ago, we saw footage of Aoun arriving at a local community to cheers and showers of rice from onlookers — a gesture of respect and celebration. Why?
He’s a hero to many, after expelling ISIS and al-Nusra Front from Lebanon’s border with Syria in 2017; maintaining the army’s integrity while other national institutions crumbled; and refusing to crack down when widespread anti-corruption protests broke out. To the contrary, he went viral with a speech channelling protestor frustrations.
And yet, several of our friends who’ve served in Lebanon surprised us with their reaction overnight — notwithstanding the situation above, they’re despondent. After all Lebanon has suffered over the decades, they’ll only believe this when they see it.
And see it, maybe they will.
Also worth noting:
Aoun was due to retire last year, but Lebanon’s legislature has extended his term twice. He’s fluent in Arabic, French, and English.
Lebanon’s 1943 ‘National Pact’ stipulates that the president and military chief must be Maronite Christian (like Aoun), the prime minister must be Sunni, and the speaker must be Shia.
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇦🇿
Azerbaijan
: President Aliyev has accused Russia of
orchestrating a
“cover up”
of the downing of an Azerbaijani airliner by Russian air defences last month. Relations between Baku and Moscow have always been tricky (Russia typically held closer ties with rival Armenia), but they’re now going south over this incident.
🇮🇹
Italy
: Iranian authorities have
freed Italian journalist Cecilia Sala
, after detaining her on unspecified charges since 19 December. We’ll be waiting to see whether
Italian
authorities now release Mohammad Abedini, after arresting him on a US request just days before Sala’s arrest above.
🇹🇭
Thailand
: Bangkok has introduced a
ban on the import of plastic waste
, to address concerns around toxic pollution. Thailand became a top destination for plastic waste exports from the EU, US, UK, and Japan after China imposed a ban in 2017-18.
🇧🇷
Brazil
: According to Reuters, investigators have accused China-based EV company BYD of bringing hundreds of
Chinese workers on irregular visas
to build a factory in Brazil. Local authorities claim BYD was using over 150 such workers, hired via a contractor and placed in “
slavery-like conditions
”.
🇬🇭
Ghana
: John Mahama has
taken the oath of office
to return as president for the third time, in a ceremony attended by around 20 African leaders. Mahama will now have to confront his predecessor’s legacy, including a deep economic crisis and debt default.
FROM OUR SPONSORS
2025 is your next chapter. How do you want to fill it?
Join over 5 million people worldwide who’ve already found support through BetterHelp’s fully online platform. Therapy is accessible anytime, anywhere, and you’ll be matched with one of 30,000+ licensed therapists who understand your goals. To make starting even easier, you’ll get 30% off your first three months of therapy and can use your FSA funds to cover costs. This year is your story to write.
Start today with BetterHelp and make it one you love.
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Diplomats on the move
🇺🇸
US
President Joe Biden has cancelled an
upcoming visit to Rome
on 9-12 January as California’s wildfires spread.
🇬🇧
UK
Chancellor Rachel Reeves will
travel to China
this week for finance-focused talks with Vice Premier He Lifeng.
🇮🇷
Iranian
President Masoud Pezeshkian is set to
visit Moscow
on 17 January, potentially to sign some kind of comprehensive cooperation agreement.
🇮🇩
Indonesian
President Prabowo Subianto is reportedly
planning a visit to Saudi Arabia
later this month to lobby for an increased quota for Indonesian pilgrims to Mecca.
And
🇨🇳
China’s
foreign minister Wang Yi is in the middle of his yearly
Africa trip
, with stops in Namibia, the Republic of the Congo, Chad, and Nigeria.
MEME OF THE DAY
For more, follow our resident meme connoisseur (@dickerpicss on Insta).
It’s an honour to represent your country in any form, right? Chess, sumo wrestling, diplomacy, whatever. But as the above pie chart suggests, that doesn’t necessarily mean diplomacy is:
Well paid (though sure, our
salary report
found that some diplomats do better than others)
Low stress (though sure, those freshly-made embassy reception dill-and-salmon canapés won’t eat themselves), or
Family friendly (though sure, your kids can vent to their therapists about it in several languages fluently).
DAILY POLL
Do you think Aoun can rebuild Lebanon?
✅ Yes, he's got the key players on board
❌ No, Lebanon's issues go far beyond the president
✍️ Other (write us!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
How serious do you think Trump is about Greenland?
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️
👀
Pretty serious, he'll make a move soon (22%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🤔
Eh, he's given it some thought (42%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️
🤣
Not serious, he's just trolling (32%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!)  (4%)
Your two cents:
🤔
S.G.G:
“I think he fully believes in it, but it'll be another thing he says he'll do and doesn't follow through on.”
👀
W.H:
“If Greenland indeed becomes independent, I could easily see Trump calling for a local plebiscite on a formal union with the US.”
✍️ B.G:
“The ‘madman’ theory is at it again. Trump values his reputation as a guy who makes deals, not wars, too much to countenance invasion, but the crazy threats build pressure - the question is what Trump really wants out of Denmark. Probably preferential access to Greenland's mineral wealth for American companies.”
🤣
A.A:
“How about we wait until he's actually in office? If we react to every speculative comment Trump makes, we're not going to survive the next four years.”
Was this forwarded to you? We're a team of ex-diplomats producing a concise and engaging geopolitical briefing for 100k+ leaders each day.
It’s free to subscribe
.