URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/will-that-xi-putin-modi-pic-change-anything
Title: 🌍 Will that Xi-Putin-Modi pic change anything?

Today’s briefing:
— Will that Xi-Putin-Modi pic change anything?
— Trump’s mystery announcement
— Why Kazakhs are phasing out old notes
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Here in the US, we’ve hit that stage of the year when the air’s crisp and the leaves are turning golden. This also means that the PSLs and Mariah Carey are just around the corner, threatening to pull us firmly into fall-winter.
For those working in diplomacy, this month is not unlike the awards season for international relations, with big annual gatherings like the UN General Assembly and Climate Week kicking off in New York in a couple of weeks. (And make sure you stay tuned to Intrigue for all the on-the-ground tea.
☕
)
But there’s another gathering now generating some buzz — is it as consequential for setting the global agenda? Let’s dive into what just went down at the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization
meeting in Tianjin.
Announcement of the day
2:00pm
That’s when President Trump is due to make an unspecified announcement today (Tuesday), after a pause in public appearances fuelled days of wild online speculation around his health.
Summit season
We’ve had two iconic images in a week, each triggering a certain amount of international “
ermahgerd”
: first, there’s the
romance
of the big Taylor-Travis “
we just got engaged!
” pic, ratifying ties between the 14-time Grammy-winner and NFL’s GOAT tight end.
And now there’s the
bromance
of the Xi-Putin-Modi “
bring on the multipolar order!
” pic, trumpeting ties among the world’s two most populous states (and the world’s largest).
But why now?
China’s Xi Jinping just hosted the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization
(SCO) summit in the port city of Tianjin, two hours out of Beijing. The SCO emerged after the Cold War as China moved to stabilise its western frontiers and suppress separatism.
These days, Beijing sees the
10-member bloc
(featuring Russia, India, Iran, Pakistan and most ‘Stans) more as a way to project soft power out across its Eurasian periphery while also seeking to counter US influence and usher in a more multipolar world.
So let’s take a quick look at
how each world leader sees this summit, starting with…
🇮🇳
Narendra Modi
This is Modi’s first visit to regional rival
China
in ~
seven years
. That’s a really long absence when you remember they’re neighbours, but it continues their cautious thaw after their infamous high-altitude border skirmish of 2020.
Of course, the timing also matches a vivid sense of betrayal amid 50%
US tariffs
over India’s Russian oil shopping spree: Modi’s message here is “
I’ve got options
”.
🇷🇺
Vladimir Putin
As in India, Russian outlets are rolling footage of their
leader on the world stage
— matching Putin’s vaunted Trump-limo ride with a lengthy one alongside Modi, it all aims to defy Western-led sanctions, condemnation, and isolation. And…
Notching up his ~42nd
meeting with Xi
(and his sixth since invading Ukraine), Putin is also trying to signal the strength of his ties with China, whose support has (with India) really helped keep Putin’s economy afloat. Speaking of Xi…
🇨🇳
Xi Jinping
Hosting 20+ world leaders, Xi gets to
pitch himself
to his own people as China’s strong and indispensable statesman amid all the economic uncertainty in the air.
He also gets to
pitch his China
to the world as leading a ‘fairer’ (ie, non-US-led) order, built on a new “
global governance initiative
”. Like his earlier initiatives on development, security, and ‘civilisation’, there’s scant detail here, though Xi emphasises the role of “
sovereign equality
” and the “
international rule of law
”.
So there you go, dear Intriguer: from Super Bowl-sized rings to sovereign equality, it’s a week of iconic partnerships — the question is which of them will stand the test of time.
Intrigue’s Take
Something we miss about life back on the other side of the encryption wall is the way folks on the inside can be a little less breathless about each new headline. Diplomats and intel types don’t generate revenue from clicks, meaning they can take a deep breath and ask the questions few are taking the time to pose out in public. Here are just three:
First
, does this Tianjin summit
really
change anything? Does it slow Putin’s losses on the battlefield? Does it plug Xi’s property collapse? Does it help Modi dodge Trump’s tariffs? Will Xi’s new ‘SCO Bank’ succeed where his BRICS Bank has not? No.
Second
, will this Tianjin photo opp help its participants resolve all their historical rivalries? Will it help (say) India make up with Pakistan, India with China, Uzbekistan with Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan with Kyrgyzstan, and so on? No.
And
third
, it didn’t get airtime, but where was Modi
right
before China? He was in Western-aligned Japan! So maybe his China cameo was less some radical new pivot, and more a vivid continuation along the path we already know well (India is
multi
-aligned).
Now, none of this is to suggest this SCO summit means nothing. Rather, our instincts just nudge us to query too many breathless takes that maybe it means everything.
But then the question becomes… what
does
this SCO summit mean? For us, its ambitious if fractious membership still points to dreams of
displacing
the US, but not replacing it.
Sound even smarter:
Several leaders (but not Modi) now head to Beijing for China’s big WWII
Victory Day
tomorrow (Wednesday), along with North Korea’s Kim Jong Un.
No formal US allies are SCO members, though some (like Turkey and Saudi Arabia) are SCO ‘dialogue partners’ as they try to balance competing ties.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇬🇧
UK
-
Market moves
.
The rate on the UK’s 30-year bonds has hit its highest since 1998 (yes, even higher than when Liz Truss got ousted), as markets query the Starmer government’s ability to get the country’s finances back on track ahead of the autumn budget. (
Bloomberg
$)
Comment:
Bonds everywhere are having a moment (hence gold also hitting new records), but the UK risks a doom loop unless it can figure out some way to raise revenue (taxes) without hitting growth.
🇸🇩
SUDAN
-
Landslide
.
A landslide triggered by heavy rains has left a reported 1,000 dead in western Sudan, where many had just sought refuge from the ongoing civil war. (
DW
)
🇯🇵
JAPAN
-
Full steam ahead.
The UK and Japan have reiterated their commitment to jointly developing (with Italy) sixth-generation fighter jets by 2035. (
UKDJ
)
Comment
: This doubling-down on their ‘Global Combat Air Programme’ comes just as various allies move to
cancel their F-35 orders with the US
, though it involves several firsts for all involved (both technologically and cooperatively). Meanwhile, Norway just chose the UK to help deliver Oslo’s next five naval frigates from 2029.
🇪🇺
EUROPEAN UNION
-
What you von der Playen?
Just after Bulgarian authorities blamed Moscow for jamming the EU chief’s jet navigation, Germany’s top general has revealed he’s had two similar experiences (once during a flight over the Baltic, then again during a visit to Lithuania). (
BBC
)
Comment
: There’s a running joke how the EU only ever expresses “concern”, no matter how outrageous the events. On this occasion, however, von der Leyen dialled her words up a little, declaring “Putin has not changed, and he will not change. He is a predator. He can only be kept in check through strong deterrence.
"
🇹🇭
THAILAND
-
You’re fired.
A Thai court finally ousted Paetongtarn Shinawatra as prime minister on Friday, weeks after Cambodia
leaked a phone call
in which she criticised the (powerful) Thai military. The jostling to replace her continues, but political gridlock in Thailand tends to always benefit one player either way (the military). (
Straits Times
)
Anyway, speaking of juicy leaks…
🇦🇷
ARGENTINA
-
Hot water.
President Milei is rejecting corruption allegations after leaked phone recordings purported to incriminate him and his sister/chief of staff in a national disability agency embezzlement scheme. (
F24
)
Comment
: Argentina’s mid-term legislative elections next month are shaping up as the first real test for Milei, whose drastic spending cuts have managed to slash inflation, but have also entailed widespread hardship.
🇪🇬
EGYPT
-
That’s a little harsh.
It turns out authorities have been detaining dozens of young TikTokkers on charges ranging from indecency to money laundering. They include 19-year-old Mariam Ayman, who (with 9.4 million followers) has now been in jail for a month. (
ABC
)
Extra Intrigue
Here’s what people around the world are googling:
🇧🇷
Brazilian
folks looked up ‘
Setembro amarelo
’ (
Yellow September
) as
suicide awareness month
kicks off.
🇲🇾
Malaysian
film fans searched for “
Avengers doomsday trailer leak
” after Marvel
dropped a sizzle reel
that then triggered a flood of fake, alleged ‘leaks’.
And netizens in
🇰🇿
Kazakhstan
googled ‘
5000 tenge
’ as the country
phases out
old 5,000 tenge (~$9) banknotes in favour of newer, higher-security notes (which also ditch Russian captions).
From our sponsors
Trade 10 Minutes of Scrolling for Something That Sticks.
You’ve got 10 minutes of downtime. Why not use it to learn something that actually stays with you?
Babbel helps you swap doomscrolling for progress, with short lessons that are fun, practical, and designed to fit into real life. Before you know it, you’re speaking in another language.
Learn Instead and get 55% Off
Picture of the day
Contributed
It doesn’t get much more metal than playing flaming bagpipes while two shirtless bros wave red flares in the air.
And yet, this
does
get more metal when we tell you the men in question, three brothers from Scotland, were celebrating after
breaking the world record
for fastest unsupported row across the Pacific Ocean. The Maclean trio finished the 14,484km (9,000-mile) journey from Peru to Australia in 139 days, 5 hours and 52 minutes. Not sure how many seconds.
The first thing they asked for on their arrival?
The latest International Intrigue edition
Pizza.
Today’s poll
Which forum do you think will lose the most influence in the next decade?
🪖 North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)
🇨🇳 Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO)
🇺🇳 United Nations (UN)
🌐 G20
🌍 BRICS
™️ World Trade Organization (WTO)
✍️ Other (write us!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
What do you think about the Xi, Putin, and Modi meeting in China this week?
📸
It's just a photo opp (20%)
🤝
They're re-aligning against US pressure (78%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (2%)
Your two cents:
🤝
S.K:
“A massive U-turn from Modi, after cultivating Trump's support in his 1st term.”
📸
D.D:
“They’re still competing with each other. Strongmen don’t have real lasting alliances.”
✍️
S.S.P:
“It's an indication of a global shift that goes beyond merely the U.S. pressure brought to bear by the Trump Administration - it is the breakdown of the U.S.-centered global order and China filling the power vacuum.”