URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/will-trump-hit-venezuela
Title: 🌍 Will Trump hit Venezuela?

Today’s briefing:
— Will Trump hit Venezuela?
— Russia might get a new base
— And the DJ of the year is…
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. One story we at Intrigue HQ have constantly tracked is the
regional tensions swirling around Venezuela
.
Political shifts across Latin America mean Venezuela’s neighbours have gradually moved away from the once-popular ‘Chavismo’ movement (founded by ex-president Chavez and carried on by today’s Maduro), and begun re-evaluating their ties with Venezuela.
Let’s dive into all the tea in today’s top story.
App of the day
Sanchar Saathi
That’s the name (meaning ‘Telecom Companion’) of India’s state-controlled cybersecurity app, which the government is now mandating for all new smartphones, sparking privacy concerns.
Face-off
Hot take, but many in DC believe the US and Venezuela are headed to war. Why? Well….
On the US side
, the National Security Council met on Venezuela yesterday (Monday), just after Trump
a
) reportedly delivered a Friday ultimatum for Venezuela’s Maduro to leave or be forced out, then
b
) moved (via tweet) to close Venezuelan airspace.
On the Venezuelan side
, Maduro has now rejected both
a
) what he sees as imperialist yankee threats, and
b
) Trump’s Friday ultimatum, and is now pleading with the OPEC oil cartel for help, arguing the US just wants Venezuela’s oil reserves (the world’s largest).
And
how’s the rest of the world responding?
Major airlines have now duly hit pause, leaving us wondering if Miami-based Venezuelan mega-band
Los Amigos Invisibles
will proceed with its big home-coming tour due to kick off in Caracas on Friday. The only carriers still braving the skies are from nearby Colombia, Panama, and Bolivia.
As for the region’s presidential palaces?
Lima and Santiago
Both
Peru
and
Chile
are nervous — under Maduro, Venezuela’s complete collapse (which predates US sanctions by years btw) has sent eight
million
folks fleeing across — and destabilizing — the region. Fed-up Chileans now look set to elect a hardline new president in response, with undocumented Venezuelans already fleeing north to Peru.
And that’s prompted Peru — stuck in a rolling political crisis since ~2016-17 — to now deploy extra troops to the border under a
state of emergency
.
Now throw in the possibility of conflict? Both are bracing for even more new arrivals.
Havana
Take a spin through
Cuban
state media, and you’ll see the hottest trending piece announces that
“the next direct flight from Russia to Venezuela is still scheduled.”
They’re highlighting defiance of US diktats.
Why?
Beyond their own ideological alignment with Maduro, there’s probably a fear that if Venezuela’s Maduro loses his grip on power, Cuba’s own Castro legacy might be next.
Bogota
Colombia
’s Gustavo Petro is walking his own tightrope: amid miserable polling numbers, he’s doubling down on his Trump criticism (whether oil or boat-strikes), while calling on everyone to just let the Venezuelans figure it out themselves — he’s even offered Cartagena as a venue for opposition-Maduro talks.
Then at the other end of the spectrum there’s…
Buenos Aires
Argentina
’s firebrand leader Javier Milei has always been a fervent Maduro critic — he’s backed up the rhetoric by helping shelter opposition members in his Caracas embassy, and on Monday calling for the
International Criminal Court
to arrest Maduro for crimes against humanity — the ICC has been in investigation mode there since 2018.
And as for South America’s biggest player…?
Brasília
Brazil
’s President Lula made headlines in 2023 when he not only met Venezuela’s Maduro, but seemingly downplayed the dictator’s human rights abuses — he’s also criticised what he sees as US imperialism, in line with Brazil’s non-interventionist tradition.
But with US-Brazil ties wobbling, Lula has now focused more on mediation efforts, while also helping steward Argentina’s embassy in Caracas lately.
Oh, and
Mexico
? It’s the other key player here, with enough regional influence to back or discredit whatever comes next — it’s long felt the brunt of Venezuela’s collapse, though any hint of support for a US intervention will trigger political blowback at home.
Intrigue’s Take
There was recently a cheeky meme showing a text exchange between Maduro and Putin, with the Venezuelan strongman flagging that he could really use a lil’ help right now, and the Russian despot responding “
oooh sounds tough bro, hope you find someone!
”
It hints at
the line China and Russia are now walking
with their support for Maduro: just enough to sap US bandwidth away from other priorities like Taiwan or Ukraine, but not enough to actually get pulled into the quagmire themselves.
Meanwhile, it’s interesting to see regional players
urge the Venezuelans to figure this out themselves
: it sounds magnanimous and can even be wise in many contexts, though it’s hard to find many dictators in the region who’ve voluntarily left power through domestic dialogue alone while still controlling both the military and treasury. In fact, some of those now most forcefully opposing US intervention — whether Cuba’s Castro heirs or Nicaragua’s Sandinistas — themselves famously seized power with foreign backing.
Anyway, Trump might’ve now
painted himself into a corner
:
leave Maduro in power and watch his apotheosis into a hero who defied the US,
just
as the US seeks to reassert its dominance via a modern ‘
Don
roe’ Doctrine, or
pull the trigger and risk US casualties plus local civilian deaths, while rivals like China and Russia continue to cast you as the most volatile source of instability.
Trump’s
best-case scenario
might be to keep ratcheting up the pressure until Maduro finally takes an offramp into exile. His
second-best scenario
might be to keep ratcheting up the pressure until one of Maduro’s own officers pulls a Rodriguez (the Paraguayan general who restored democracy).
Or he might hope
a surgical US operation
could oust Maduro quickly, though even Bush Sr’s rapid ousting of Panama’s Noriega still left 23 US troops dead before getting a
relatively
benign place in history as one of the rare interventions that ushered in a stable democracy.
And that’s before we add the fact that most Americans say they’re against an intervention.
Sound even smarter:
Meanwhile, US Defence Secretary Pete Hegseth has confirmed he authorised the controversial ‘double-tap’ strike on a suspected drug boat on 2 September, though denies giving the alleged verbal “
kill everybody
” order. US lawmakers are now investigating the strike amid claims it constitutes murder or a war crime.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
Minderoo Foundation
A single litre of seawater holds the secrets to ocean life.
On Ningaloo Reef, scientists are using revolutionary environmental DNA (eDNA) to track everything from bacteria to whale sharks. It’s fast, scalable, and completely non-invasive.
This conservation breakthrough is filling critical data gaps in our most remote oceans, revealing hidden species and helping save sharks before nearly a third go extinct.
Discover more about the work of Australian conservationists using frontier technology to protect our oceans before it’s too late.
Watch the film now in BBC StoryWorks’ Living Legacy series.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇭🇰
HONG KONG
-
Blaze arrests.
Authorities have now arrested 13 on manslaughter grounds over last week’s devastating inferno that torched seven apartment towers and left 150+ dead. The detainees include the directors of a construction company involved in extensive renovations, amid outrage that the firm ignored safety warnings. (
The Guardian
)
Comment:
It’s a perfect storm not just for Hong Kong but its Beijing rulers: state outlets initially blamed Hong Kong’s traditional bamboo scaffolding, but the evidence points to flammable safety netting made and “certified” on the mainland, while two of the 13 detainees seem to be random citizens asking too many questions.
🇸🇩
SUDAN
-
Russia, want a base?
Sudan has reportedly offered Russia its first naval base on the African continent, according to exclusive reporting by the WSJ. (
WSJ
$)
Comment
: If the deal goes through, it’ll give Russia’s navy a prime spot on the Red Sea, one of the world’s most important trade bottlenecks. The article suggests the Russians will in turn help arm Sudan’s military — we’re guessing the Sudanese will also want the Russians to *stop
*
backing the notorious rival RSF paramilitary.
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
Manufacturing slump
.
Beijing’s official figures suggest its export rebound has failed to halt a manufacturing slump, with a key purchasing managers index (PMI) lagging below the crucial 50 mark (contraction territory) for an eighth consecutive month in November. Unusually, a more-upbeat
private
PMI (tracking different firms and locations) also dipped below 50 in November. (
Bloomberg
$)
Comment
: It all highlights the dilemma for China’s leader: while the US trade truce has given exports a bump, it’s also exposed them as an increasingly lonely growth driver, while foreign markets keep erecting new barriers to protect their own firms.
🇨🇭
SWITZERLAND
-
Treat the rich.
Voters have overwhelmingly rejected a referendum to tax $60M+ inheritances at 50% to fund climate initiatives, plus another that would’ve introduced mandatory national-civic service for young people. The government and parliament opposed both proposals on economic and cost grounds. (
France24
)
🇧🇩
BANGLADESH
-
No extradition.
A Bangladeshi court has handed British MP Tulip Siddiq a two-year sentence in-absentia over claims she influenced her aunt (ousted strongwoman Sheikh Hasina) in a land deal. Siddiq denies any wrongdoing. (
Independent
).
Comment
: The UK doesn’t have an extradition treaty with Bangladesh, so we don’t see this saga going any further assuming Siddiq avoids future family visits.
🇨🇦
CANADA
-
Let us in.
Ottawa has secured a deal to sell arms into one of the EU’s joint defence procurement schemes, becoming the $154B program’s first non-European member. The UK’s own entry bid collapsed on Friday amid reports the EU wanted to charge a multi-billion dollar fee. (
Politico
)
Comment
: Everyone’s hustling for that elusive balance between re-arming asap, while maximising the benefit for their own defence firms.
🇲🇿
MOZAMBIQUE
-
Brits pull the ripcord.
The UK and Dutch governments have now pulled their billion-dollar support for France’s big LNG project in Mozambique, citing heightened risks. The project has been on hold since an ISIS offshoot massacred ~1,300 townspeople in 2021, before local security forces then massacred another ~100. (
Le Monde
$)
Extra Intrigue
What people around the world are googling:
🇹🇿
Folks in
Tanzania
looked for more ‘
Hassna
’ updates as the
president went viral
for reportedly parachuting family members into government jobs.
🇦🇺
Australians
searched for ‘
defence overhaul
’ after the government unveiled a series of
sweeping changes to the defence department
.
🇬🇭
And
Ghana
’s music lovers googled ‘
Ghana DJ awards 2025
’ as DJ Sly King walked away the night’s
DJ of the year
.
From our sponsors
Unlock Amazon Prime Perks You Never Knew Existed.
Amazon Prime offers much more than just free shipping! Ensure you're getting the most out of your membership with help from our deal experts. Discover 9 Prime benefits you should be using.
Discover Your Perks
Word of the day
Credits: Oxford University Press.
Breaking news! The English language has a new Word of the Year, and it’s something we usually avoid here at Intrigue: ‘
rage bait
’. The boffins at Oxford define it as online content deliberately designed to elicit outrage to increase engagement.
We’d like to think (???) the runner-up is a little more on-brand for us:
aura farming
means cultivating an impressive, cool, and mysterious online persona.
Today’s poll
Which outcome do you think is now most likely in Venezuela?
🤝 Maduro sticks around under some kind of deal
✈️ Maduro goes voluntarily into exile
🪖 Maduro gets ousted by force
✍️ Other (write us!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think China will move to take Taiwan militarily in the next five years?
🚢
Yes, tell us why... (50%)
⛔ No, tell us why... (48%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (2%)
Your two cents:
H:
“Too many other areas of the world are demanding attention. The issue of Taiwan's sovereignty is moving to the back burner...”
⛔
O.G.C:
“They could take Taiwan slowly through economic and political interference without ever risking an all-out war.”
✍️ “China's export dependent economy cannot support the political ramifications of being a solo provocateur. If a true global conflict erupts within the next 5 years, then it is highly likely that China will make a move on Taiwan.”