URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/will-trump-hit-iran-again-2fa0
Title: 🌍 Will Trump hit Iran again?

Today’s briefing:
— Will Trump hit Iran again?
— The suspect formerly known as a prince
— You’re under arrest (for a Substack)
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. I am prone to unpredictable though mercifully short-lived bouts of earnestness. For example: last weekend I found myself reading
Mending Wall
by Robert Frost which, if you’re an English major and/or a New Englander you will know is a terrific poem ostensibly about the silliness of building walls to divide us. Hot take: Robert Frost was a good poet.
But it’s the ending that has lingered in the back of my brain: “
He will not go behind his father’s saying, And he likes having thought of it so well, He says again,
’Good fences make good neighbors.’”
Frost is frustrated that his neighbour is blindly and self-satisfiedly repeating a slogan passed down to him, without ever interrogating its meaning. He wrote this in 1914 and the obvious point to make is how well that idea explains our media, political, cultural
[insert your personal gripe]
moment some 100+ years later.
But I’ve been taking some comfort lately that the more I read things from (or about) a previous era, the more I realise none of this **** today is really “
unprecedented
”. Folks have been warring since the second amoeba crawled out of the primordial ooze and didn’t like the look of the first. And people have been blindly following directions they don’t understand since, well, at least Frost’s time. I don’t say this to downplay the gravity of our current global predicament, or that sloganeering politicians of all persuasions are seeking to mislead us, but only to (hopefully) give you an anxiety break over the weekend.
Earnestness ended. Back to more pressing matters:
is the US about to bomb Iran again?
Read on to find out!
Crisis of the day
Blue Owl
That’s the name of the New York-listed alternative asset manager that’s now restricted investors from exiting one of its funds, fuelling fears of a private credit bubble. But some analysts are taking comfort that Blue Owl also just sold $1.4B in loan assets at 99.7% of their stated value.
Winds of war
The weekend is rolling around, which in recent times has meant one of two things:
a
) Sabrina Carpenter is about to unveil her latest brand collab, or
b
) the US is about to launch its latest daring military operation.
As much as we’re keen to explore Sabrina’s Pringle-scented Redken hair mist and Dunkin’ x Prada fragrance line, the US-Iran temperature has spiked so we really need to focus.
But first to quickly and casually recap, the regime is now looking wobblier than ever after…
a
) Israel degraded decades of Iran’s proxy strategy in ~13 months
b
) the US and Israel hit Iran’s key air defences and nuclear sites in a night, and
c
) a mix of corruption, incompetence, autocracy, drought, and sanctions then triggered an economic collapse and historic street protests, until a desperate crackdown left
up to
(nobody knows) 30,000 people dead.
And with the world now watching, Trump 2.0 still says he
sees
Iran as a “
continuing unusual and extraordinary threat to the United States
”. Why?
Beyond the above and below, consider this:
North Korea’s example
suggests you can be the weirdest, wackiest, most brutal, corrupt, and incompetent excuse for a regime, but if you can sneak your way to nuclear power status, you’re untouchable.
Enter Trump’s ‘
good cop, unpredictable cop
’ strategy.
Trump 2.0 continues to pursue talks, both direct and indirect. But while the latest Geneva round concluded with more vague references to “
progress
”, some big differences remain.
It depends which leak you want to believe, but basically the US is demanding Iran…
end its
uranium
enrichment
end its support for armed
proxies
(Hamas, Hezbollah, Houthis etc), and
tone down its
ballistic
missile program (range, quantity, etc).
And yet while the precise message changes from day to day, Iran’s mullahs basically see the above ultimatum as
unacceptable
. Why?
Consider the inverse of our North Korea example above:
Gaddafi’s
Libya
suggests you can be every bit as wacky and brutal and corrupt, but ditch your WMDs and you end up dead in a ditch, while…
Ukraine
shows you can instead pursue the Western dream of freedom and jet skis, but give up those nukes (as Kyiv did in the 1990s) and you still end up fighting for your life because of some dictator next door.
So fundamentally, the mullahs will see this all as
regime survival
: acquiesce to those demands, and the clock starts ticking via emboldened foes, whether at home or abroad.
See how easy it is to arrive at a stalemate?
So in parallel, President Trump has dialled up the pressure to force a breakthrough via…
the biggest US military footprint in the region since the 2003 invasion of Iraq
a demonstrated willingness to pull the trigger (cf Maduro, Iran 2025), plus
warnings that “
really bad things
” will happen if there’s no deal within 10-15 days.
So, what’s next?
Whether it’s calculated info-war or just actual facts, there are more and more signs pointing to some kind of attack being imminent, whether…
multiple US outlets reporting the Pentagon will be ready by tomorrow (Saturday)
Poland’s own Donald (Tusk) issuing a chilling warning for his citizens to get out, or
The
Wall Street Journal
spelling out that Trump is now picking from a menu of limited strike options to force a deal before going harder if Iran still refuses.
If something
does
happen, Trump’s recent practice suggests it’d be after markets close for the weekend. Oh, and speaking of markets, Brent crude prices are up ~6% this week alone, now hovering near six-month highs as traders glimpse something coming.
Intrigue’s Take
You might’ve heard the name
Gérard Araud
. He’s a retired senior French diplomat who’s made more headlines than most, whether via his interesting 2018 exchange with night-show host Trevor Noah, or his comparison of Trump 1.0 to Louis XIV, or his ambassadorial farewell from Washington, lamenting that the US capital was full of awful jeans (lol).
Anyway, all that by way of throat-clearing to highlight a point Araud made about Iran this week: “
whatever their religious rhetoric, their final decision is always geopolitical based on a shrewd assessment of the balance of power.
”
It reminds us of the kind of ‘
strategic empathy
’ we were always taught to practice in the foreign service: to be clear, it’s got nothing to do with
sympathising
with these dictators. Rather, it’s about developing sharper insights by trying to understand how they see the world, why they see it that way, and how it shapes what comes next.
And for the reasons we’ve explored above, this standoff is shaping up as existential for the regime.
The one narrow off-ramp
we see might resemble a tougher version of the Obama-era JCPOA nuclear deal that Trump 1.0 axed: that deal worked in the sense that Iran’s uranium enrichment plummeted, but it also didn’t work in the sense it unblocked cash that fuelled the regime’s proxy strategy across the region, contributing to everything from the Israel-Hamas war to the strangling of Red Sea maritime traffic.
So for Iran to take that offramp, any deal might need to just mothball (not destroy) its nuclear program. And for Trump to take it, the offramp would need to be tougher than the Obama-era deal he’s spent years dunking on, across enrichment, proxies, and ballistics.
The Venn diagram between those two positions is tiny, but it’s there. But assuming these two foes can’t find it? War.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
Wildgrain
Sick of bread getting moldy before you can finish it?
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by Wildgrain. They make it easier for you to enjoy bread that’s both delicious and better for you than typical grocery store options. All of Wildgrain's breads are slow fermented for 20+ hours, which not only delivers incredible flavor but also makes them naturally easier to digest.
In addition to the delicious breads, fill your Wildgrain box with slow-churned butter, fresh pastas, and seasonal artisanal pastries. Everything bakes from frozen in just 25 minutes or less. They have an all new gluten-free box with the best gluten-free breads you’ve ever had. Wildgrain is giving
Intrigue
readers
$30 off their first box plus free croissants in every box!
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇮🇩
INDONESIA — Trade deal, Board of Peace.
On the sidelines of the first
Board of Peace
summit (where members pledged ~$5B to Gaza’s reconstruction), the US and Indonesia have signed a deal to virtually eliminate duties on American goods in return for the US dropping its tariffs on Indonesia from 32% to 19%. (
Politico
)
Comment
:
By way of context, the UN estimates the total Gaza reconstruction bill is closer to $70B.
🇬🇧
UNITED KINGDOM — Andrew arrested.
King Charles III has emphasised the “
law must take its course
” after police arrested his younger brother (formerly Prince Andrew) on suspicion of sharing sensitive government information with Jeffrey Epstein. Authorities released him after almost 10 hours of questioning, though he’s still under investigation. (
Guardian
)
🇰🇵
NORTH KOREA — Our vision.
According to state media, Kim Jong Un has opened North Korea’s ninth party congress, touting five years of economic recovery since Covid-19. (
Reuters
)
Comment:
It’s the hermit state’s biggest political event since 2021, and you can bet analysts will parse proceedings for any clues about the dictator’s intentions.
🇪🇺
EUROPEAN UNION — Waving the finger.
The European Commission has called an emergency meeting after Hungary and Slovakia halted diesel supplies to Ukraine, alleging Kyiv has deliberately delayed repairs after a Russian attack damaged a pipeline that supplies them. (
Euronews
)
Comment:
Hungary and Slovakia could (and should) just stop buying Russian energy, but are instead challenging an EU law ending Russian energy purchases by 2027.
🇲🇾
MALAYSIA
— Shut up or pay up.
Malaysia's telecom regulator has dropped its criminal case against an Australian writer living in Thailand, after he apologised and retracted 10 Substack articles which variously accused Malaysia’s regulator of overreach and politicisation. (
AP
)
Comment:
Maybe Team Intrigue should travel less?
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES — Odd man out.
The US energy secretary (Wright) has warned DC could leave the International Energy Agency (IEA) if it doesn’t return to its founding mission of energy security rather than net-zero. In response, the chair (Dutch deputy PM) says the IEA is meant to provide governments with all scenarios to inform decisions. (
Barron’s
)
🇹🇳
TUNISIA — From Facebook to the slammer.
A Tunisian court has sentenced a lawmaker to eight months in prison for mocking President Saied on Facebook. (
Al-Monitor
)
Comment:
Saied (once an anti-corruption outsider and law professor pledging reform) has now become the very thing he opposed.
Extra Intrigue
Weekend reccs from Team Intrigue
Watch:
The Olympic
closing ceremony
(tragic!) this Sunday at 8PM CET — that’s 11am in LA, 2pm in New York, 7pm in London, or 6am Monday in Sydney.
Binge:
The acclaimed second season of
The Artful Dodger
on Disney+ and Hulu, created by fellow Intriguer, James McNamara.
Register:
For
the online panel
that Intrigue co-founder Helen is moderating at the Institute for Global Negotiation’s annual conference next week.
From our friends
Not just another TL;DR news digest.
The Pint is the
world’s only meme-based email newsletter
, bringing you global news through memes. After failing (spectacularly) to convince traditional media outlets to open a meme desk, they went rogue and created The Pint. They trudge through global news to deliver a weekly digest of the week’s most memeable moments.
Every Friday. For Free.
Map of the day
Credits: KBS.
Step into the National Museum of Korea this month and you’ll find a 19th-century flex of sheer cartographic swagger unfurled across the gallery wall.
The Daedongyeojido (above) is a 6.7-metre-tall, 3.8-metre-wide map of the Korean Peninsula, stitched together from 22 sections by geographer Gim Jeong-ho in 1861. It helped the ruling Joseon dynasty grapple with governance issues like taxation, while also offering the kingdom a sense of territorial identity. Huge ass map.
Friday Quiz
Tomorrow (Saturday) is International Mother Language Day.
1) Which is the most spoken *native* language in the world?
(total speakers)
Mandarin
Spanish
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
2) Which country has the most *official* languages?
Papua New Guinea
Bolivia
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
3) How many languages are spoken around the world?
~ 3000
~ 7000
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate