URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/will-recognition-bring-peace-e8ada8a098150b22
Title: 🌍 Will recognition bring peace?

Today’s briefing:
— Will recognition bring peace?
— Maybe avoid this airport
— Don’t do this to an ambassador
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. There are days when an Intrigue intro is easy to write and peppered with lols, and other days when the subject is so weighty it feels impossible to succinctly discuss. Today is one of the latter days.
We’re diving into the latest announcements on
Palestinian statehood
, including from France, the UK, and Canada. It’s arguably the most unified the international community — especially the P5 — has been on a conflict in years.
Let’s dive in.
Number of the day
41.2°C (106.2
°F)
That’s how hot it got in Japan yesterday (Wednesday), its highest temperature on record.
Something's moving
Canada
has now joined
France
in announcing it'll formally recognise a State of Palestine at the UN in September. And that's just days after
the UK
flagged it'd do likewise unless Israel lets more aid in, signs a Hamas ceasefire, and halts expansions in the West Bank.
So what's going on?
The legal
definition of a state
is clear, with four elements crystallised in
the Montevideo Convention
of 1933. There must be...
A permanent population
: the West Bank and Gaza have 5.4 million Palestinians
A defined territory
: modern disputes cite the UN’s 1947 vote to split the turf into Jewish and Arab states, subsequent wars, and Israel's settlement expansion
A functioning government
: the secular-nationalist Palestinian Authority has had partial autonomy over the West Bank (under Israeli territorial control) since 1994, while Islamist group Hamas has run Gaza since it won an election then seized control in 2007, and…
An ability to engage with other states
: even capitals that don't recognise a State of Palestine have diplomatic missions in Ramallah (West Bank), engaging with the Palestinian Authority (not Hamas) and managing local aid programs.
So what's the debate around recognising a State of Palestine?
For ~147 states, there isn’t one
. Many gave recognition after the 1988
Palestinian declaration of independence
, with more following after the 1990s Oslo Accords. Ditto, ~165 capitals now recognise Israel, with announcements starting after Israel's own 1948
declaration of independence
, then continuing after Israel’s UN entry in 1949, through to the Oslo accords, and most recently Trump's Abraham Accords.
So where's the debate?
~30 mostly Arab or Muslim-majority
states still don't recognise Israel, and
~46 mostly Western or Pacific Island
states still don't recognise Palestine.
Why?
For those
not recognising Israel
, it's mostly
a
) solidarity with the Palestinians,
b
) enmity with the Israelis,
c
) theology (eg Jewish control of the Al-Aqsa Mosque, co-located with Judaism's Temple Mount), and
d
) policy (the Arab League wants Israel back to its pre-1967 war borders).
Hardliners
also openly seek Israel’s destruction.
Meanwhile, for those
not recognising Palestine
, it's about
a
) negotiating (not pre-empting) a two-state solution;
b
) backing a fellow West-aligned democracy;
c
) rejecting a semi-Hamas-run state; and
d
) a bit of theology, too (some constituencies see modern Israel as fulfilling prophecy).
Hardliners
also just reject a Palestinian state in principle.
So why now?
Since the
October 7th
Hamas attacks and the nearly two years of war that followed,
nine more capitals
have now recognised Palestine (Jamaica, Bahamas, Barbados, Trinidad, Spain, Norway, Ireland, Slovenia, and Armenia). And now France will follow suit, while the UK has attached the above
conditions
on Israel, and Canada is attaching conditions on the Palestinian Authority (PA), including a demand it hold elections next year.
Why?
These capitals have variously cited
outrage
at suffering in Gaza,
frustration
at the stalled peace process,
support
for a two-state solution, and
opposition
to Israeli policies, actions, and words (Bibi and some cabinet members have openly opposed a Palestinian state). These capitals have also faced related domestic protests and political pressures.
But it's really
these last three announcements
(France, UK, Canada) that are big because they're all G7 powers, US allies, and generally supporters of Israel. France and the UK are also nuclear powers and permanent members of the UN Security Council. So there's the real prospect that other Western powers might now be more likely to follow.
Then what’s the problem?
Israel, the US, and other critics argue this all rewards terrorism, pressures Israel rather than Hamas (which still holds ~50 hostages, half alive), and undermines ongoing talks: the longer Hamas holds out, the more recognition.
Though on that last point,
some very interesting news
just broke this week: the 22-member Arab League has joined the EU and 17 others calling for Hamas to disarm and relinquish power in Gaza to end the war. For several of the region’s major players (like Saudi Arabia, Egypt, and Qatar), that’s unprecedented.
Intrigue’s Take
So, what can we learn from all this?
First
, this is arguably a pivot to try building a two-state solution from the outside-in, rather than waiting (indefinitely?) for one to emerge on the ground. And to do that, it’s reframing recognition not so much as the end goal, but a starting point.
Second
, will it work? You only get to play this card once, but maybe the big three here will shift the dial in ways the 147 before them didn’t: the war persists, hostages remain, the Hamas-Fatah split festers, Bibi still rules, and the PA still hasn’t held an election since 2005-06. And speaking of elections…
Third
, a tricky thing about holding elections in the West Bank next year (per Canada’s condition) is the fact we might not like who wins:
credible polling
suggests there’s more support for Hamas than for the ruling secular-nationalist Fatah, hence Canada’s condition that Hamas can’t participate.
So maybe that’s what makes this week’s Arab League announcement every bit as big as the French, British, and Canadian announcements: not just seeking to shape events via external recognition, but via deep philosophical and political reforms from within.
Here at Intrigue, we're incurable optimists. And maybe something's moving.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
The Hustle
The Hustle is on a mission to deliver the best business-tech daily by focusing on what actually matters: growth, trends, and innovation. Unlike other news sources that bog you down with negativity, The Hustle keeps things fun and engaging while delivering the insights you need to stay ahead. Join over 2 million readers who start their morning with a quick 5-minute read that cuts through the noise and highlights the stories that impact your business and career.
Sign up free today
and discover why so many professionals trust The Hustle.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇰🇷
SOUTH KOREA
-
Truce?
President Trump says he’ll impose a 15% tariff (down from
Liberation Day
’s 25%) on long-time US ally South Korea, in exchange for $350B in investments and $100B in energy purchases. The US president says Korea will now be “
completely open
” to US products while giving Trump personal control over where Seoul’s investments go. President Lee is due to visit the White House in the next two weeks. (
Chosun
)
Comment
:
The details are similar to other recent deals the US president has announced: immediate 15% tariffs, plus longer-term investment and energy pledges. Meanwhile, Trump told reporters the US will also impose 25% tariffs on India “plus an unspecified penalty” for buying Russian oil and weapons: they can
“
take their dead economies down together, for all I care.
”
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
Not yet!
The Fed has held rates steady despite intense pressure from President Trump (and a very awkward press conference last week), sending the dollar soaring and stocks tumbling. Two Trump-appointed Fed governors dissented in favour of cuts, but Powell held firm, telling markets to wait for more data despite borrowing costs remaining at their highest level since before the 2023 inflation fight began. (
ABC
)
Comment:
We haven’t seen that level of internal Fed dissent in decades, arguably reflecting both a) current economic uncertainty, and b) the current political pressure.
🇦🇴
ANGOLA
-
Oil unrest.
Protests over fuel prices have turned deadly with at least 22 killed and 200 injured, as taxi strikes over a 33% diesel hike morph into riots, looting, and gunfire. President Lourenço has dismissed it all as a pretext to undermine his government, but with hospitals overwhelmed, flights cancelled, and supermarkets ransacked, the oil-rich nation now faces its most serious civil upheaval in years. (
TRT Global
)
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
It’s showtime.
China and Russia have announced joint drills near Vladivostok in August, coinciding with the US Air Force holding its “
biggest combat exercise in the region
”. Beijing insists the 11th iteration of these ‘Joint Sea’ drills isn’t aimed at any country, but the timing speaks volumes as Russia and China deepen their military ties. (
SCMP
)
Comment
: These exercises might present as two powerful allies working together as a show of force against the US and its allies, but it’s also a chance for China to solidify its senior status within its relationship with Russia.
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
Second runner-up.
Tech giant Microsoft became the second company to reach the $4 trillion market cap benchmark in after-hours trading Wednesday, after announcing better-than-expected quarterly earnings.
Nvidia beat Microsoft
by a few weeks. (
CNBC
)
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
Are these safe?
Beijing has summoned Nvidia executives to discuss some “
serious security issues
” around the US firm’s H20 AI chip, which is purpose-built to clear US export controls against China. China’s concern? Potential “
tracking and positioning functions
” and fears of a “
remote shutdown
” function. (
WP $
)
Comment
: We flagged surprise at the time when the White House suddenly allowed H20 sales again — was there a quiet deal? It seems the same question is fomenting a bit of paranoia in Beijing.
🇬🇧
UNITED KINGDOM
-
Fight or flight.
Disruptions at one of the world’s busiest travel hubs could continue for the next few days after Britain’s air traffic control systems went dark for 20 minutes on Wednesday, grounding and diverting flights from the country. (
Euronews
)
Extra Intrigue
In other worlds…
Tech:
Check out
this remarkable profile
on a young prodigy’s journey through the world of DOGE cost-cutting.
Commodities:
Some US copper
prices fell 17%
after President Trump announced his 50% copper tariffs will only hit certain semi-finished products.
Film:
Adam Sandler’s
Happy Gilmore 2
just had the biggest-ever opening for a Netflix film, delighting fans despite mixed reviews.
Meme of the day
Courtesy of our meme-lord JD (@DickerPicss on insta)
Ambassadors don’t usually join the foreign service dreaming of answering complex visa questions ninja-starred at them by stressed locals, and yet the reality is the only reason most folks would ever set foot in an embassy is to seek a visa or a passport.
The result can be amusing, with flustered ambassadors flailing around for a colleague to intervene, or blurting out something unhelpful, like "
if you consult our website you'll see plenty of information on there about visas.
" Ahhh, good times.
Today’s poll
What do you think will make the most difference?
🇵🇸 Recognition of a Palestinian state
🌍 Regional calls for Hamas to disarm
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
What do you think will most decide who wins the AI race?
💾
Latest hardware (8%)
👷
Best engineers (31%)
✂️ Least regulation (15%)
💸
Most government support (23%)
👐
Open source environment (18%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (5%)
Your two cents:
👷
N.D:
“Reminding an earlier technological race, ‘
Our Germans are better than their Germans
.
’”
💸
N.L:
“Tech companies live or die on regulation making things possible. Government support is key for development.”
👐
I.B:
“Li Qiang is correct. The best outcome for humanity is open source. If corporations or governments succeed in monopolistic control over AI it will not be good.”
✍️
S.B:
“The winners are the ones who can deploy private capital the fastest to fund these AI models. The US is winning that race so far.”
✍️
G.C:
“AI entities will win, we will lose.”