URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/will-trump-pull-the-trigger-67a143dde9c11dc7
Title: 🌍 Will Trump pull the trigger?

Today’s briefing:
— Will Trump pull the trigger?
— A spicy leak rocks Thailand
— How to make an easy $14k
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. The biggest “
will they, won’t they
” episode in geopolitics right now is whether the US will join Israel in its push to take out Iran’s nuclear capabilities.
You’d be forgiven for being uncertain about what the US’s official position on this issue is, especially if you watched the Tucker Carlson interview with Ted Cruz, who seemed to have hinted at US support in the campaign.
It’s a fast evolving situation, and Intrigue has been working hard to keep you in the loop. Let’s dive into the latest.
Number of the day
4.5%
That’s still the US headline interest rate after the Fed decided to leave things unchanged. Fed chair Jerome Powell said he expects “
meaningful
” inflation ahead, citing consumer and business surveys that see tariffs as a key driver.
The Israel-Iran war
If you’ve been waist-deep
doomscrolling
monitoring the situation, we feel you. Six months into Trump 2.0’s pledge to bring peace to the Middle East, another war now rages.
In the last few hours
Israel
has struck ~40 more sites across Iran, including the Arak heavy water reactor and the Natanz uranium enrichment plant
Meanwhile,
Iran
's own dwindling launches have still hit several sites across Israel, including a hospital in Beersheba (dozens reported injured)
Iran has lodged a
complaint
at the UN's nuclear watchdog claiming Israel's strikes are "
contrary to international laws that prohibit attacks on nuclear facilities
"
And Yemen’s
Houthis
say they’ll help their Iranian sponsors, while
Putin
(who just signed a security pact with Iran in January) is instead implausibly offering to mediate, even as his latest attacks on Ukrainian cities leave dozens more dead.
But the big question is…
will the US get involved?
Why
that
question?
Israel’s rationale has always been that Iran is developing nukes, and Bibi pulled this latest trigger barely hours after the UN’s nuclear watchdog called foul on
a
) Iran’s secret activities, and
b
) its rapid build-up of uranium enriched way beyond civilian needs.
But while Israeli strikes have now ruptured Iran’s nuclear production line, Iran’s vast underground nuclear bunker at
Fordow
still seems untouched (and little is known about the other fortified facility Iran’s been building over at
Pickaxe
Mountain).
Israel has no
known
weapon capable of hitting targets that deep, though it feels implausible
a
) not to have been working on something over the decades, and/or
b
) to kick off this latest round of conflict without a way to destroy Fordow.
So Bibi is either hiding something up his sleeve (rumours abound in either direction), or he was always banking on the US delivering the
coup de grace
once Iran’s air defences fell.
So that’s where the US comes in
(at least theoretically) with its purpose-built
GBU-57
bunker buster
,
each weighing ~13,600kg (30,000lb), measuring 6m (20ft), and portable only by the US B-2 stealth bomber.
So…
will Trump use America’s GBU-57 for the first time in history?
On the military front
, imagery and air-scanners make clear the US Air Force is ready if he does pull the trigger, and word is he’s approved the Pentagon’s plan, just hasn’t given the order. But that could all still just be posturing to force the ayatollah to give up.
On the intelligence front
, Trump’s own spymaster assessed in March that Iran “
is not building a nuclear weapon
”, though that was
a
) public,
b
) three months ago,
c
) caveated that Iran could change its mind, and yet also
d
) released by an intelligence community with a history not only of false positives (Iraq) but also false negatives (Syria’s Al-Kibar).
Meanwhile, Iran’s foreign ministry is
tweeting
that, while the UN’s watchdog
raised the alarm
, those UN findings didn’t conclude that Iran was actually now building nukes.
But
on the political front
, big rifts are emerging within Trump’s base as we wait, like
Yesterday’s yelling match between a hawkish senator (Cruz) and an isolationist influencer (Carlson, who Trump then called “
kooky
”), or
The president’s rift with his own spymaster after she dropped a video dunking on US elites and warmongers (before the Israelis hit Iran).
And that all kinda reflects the tensions at the heart of the president’s own statements, which have spanned everything from classic US
isolationism
(let’s avoid foreign entanglements) to classic US
primacism
(we’ll never allow a nuclear-armed Iran).
As for the ayatollah?
The 86-year-old is still talking tough, but while that’s been his brand for decades, his ability to back any of that up now looks limited, and his foreign ministry seems to be sending signals that Tehran is willing to talk.
But that feels a stretch now that his latest missile has wasted a major Israeli hospital.
Intrigue’s Take
One of the few common threads across US public opinion and political manoeuvring right now is that just about nobody seems comfortable with a nuclear-armed Iran. The debate is more around how imminent that risk might be, and what to do about it.
Against that backdrop, it’s been interesting to see different voices appeal to history:
There’s a mash-up doing the rounds showing three decades of Bibi warning Iran is close to getting nukes, the implication being he’s
crying wolf
— though Iran was also caught nuclear-handed in 2002 (Natanz and Arak) and 2009 (Fordow).
France’s President Macron has also been doing the rounds reminding us what happens when foreign powers attempt to go beyond military aims and impose any kind of
regime change
(whether in Iraq, Libya, Afghanistan, or beyond), and
You might add another mash-up of the way
Murphy’s Law
injects mistakes, miscalculations, and malfunctions right as the stakes are highest — Trump won’t want to own the next
Operation Eagle Claw
or
Black Hawk Down
, and even if a B-2 run goes smoothly, there are no
guarantees
his GBU-57 can end Fordow.
So maybe that brings us back to the Iranians themselves. There’s been enough unrest over the years to expose a real lack of popular legitimacy for the mullahs. The thing is, that kind of sentiment can quickly shift if folks’ immediate concern becomes less about Iran’s morality police on the streets, and more about Israel’s drones overhead.
Sound even smarter:
The E3 (France, Germany and the UK) will reportedly hold
nuclear talks
with Iran tomorrow (Friday).
Iran’s cyber command has
instructed
security officials to avoid using tech connected to telecom networks, likely worried about another pager-style hit.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
The Hustle
There’s a breezy, 5-minute morning read that keeps you sharp on everything business and tech.
The Hustle covers stories that matter to consumers, and summarizes the fascinating rabbit holes you don’t have time to sift through yourself. 1.5M+ people get the daily in their inbox to stay informed, and have some fun.
Join them and subscribe today!
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇹🇭
THAILAND
-
On the brink after spicy leak.
Prime Minister Shinawatra’s rule looks shaky after someone leaked her call with  Cambodia’s influential Hun Sen, in which she dunked on how the Thai military has handled recent border spats with Cambodia. She’s now dismissed her remarks as a negotiation tactic, but her 10-party alliance is wobbling. (
CNA
)
Comment
: Rule #1 in Thailand’s coup-prone politics: never diss the military. As to who leaked the call? Hun Sen has admitted recording it and sharing it with Cambodian officials and generals. Our guess is a general then leaked it, given it deflects blame from last month’s border clash that left a Cambodian soldier dead.
🇨🇰
COOK ISLANDS
-
NZ cuts funding over China deals.
New Zealand has paused the transfer of millions in funding after the Cook Islands blindsided the Kiwis in February by signing a bunch of deals with China. (
BBC
)
🇰🇷
SOUTH KOREA
-
Hello, old frenemy.
Freshly elected Lee Jae-myung has met his newish Japanese counterpart (Ishiba) at the G7 in Canada, with the two pledging “
the stable development of Japan-South Korea relations
”. Given their tumultuous history and domestic politics, it’s an early sign both sides still want to continue their recent rapprochement. (
Japan Times
)
🇬🇷
GREECE
-
You can’t have that.
Greek officials have complained after Turkey lodged a new map with UNESCO effectively claiming the maritime zones of several Greek islands. Turkey’s new map comes after Greece announced new marine parks in waters Turkey claims. (
Politico
)
🇦🇺
AUSTRALIA
-
Got my back?
The EU and Australia will soon start talks for a defence and security pact, a prerequisite for Australian defence contractors to tap Europe’s $170B joint procurement programme. (
EuroNews
)
Comment
: As the EU tries to wean itself off US arms, others are positioning themselves as part of the answer, with Australia now following similar moves by the UK (last month) and Canada (as soon as next week).
🇸🇦
SAUDI ARABIA
-
Journalist executed.
Riyadh has executed Saudi journalist Turki al-Jasser for alleged crimes including “
high treason
”. Authorities detained him in 2018 over an anonymous Twitter account critical of the Saudi regime. (
Guardian
)
Comment
: The timing won’t have been accidental, given the world is now distracted by wars next door, plus there’s now a Saudi-friendly president back in the White House.
🇦🇷
ARGENTINA
-
House arrest for Kirchner.
An Argentine court has allowed former President Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner to serve her six-year sentence for corruption in house arrest. (
Al Jazeera
)
Extra Intrigue
In other worlds…
Tech
: OpenAI has accused Meta of
trying to poach its employees
by offering sign-up bonuses to the tune of
$100M
each.
Environment
: China is planning to build the
world’s largest national park system
by 2035, with an area bigger than Texas.
Science
: The Begong moth may be
using the Milky Way to navigate its way
across Australia.
From our sponsors
BOXABL believes they have the potential to disrupt
a massive and outdated trillion-dollar building construction market.
They aim to transform home construction, bringing assembly line efficiency and mass production to an artisanal, slow industry.
Invest in BOXABL’s offering at just $0.80/share. All BOXABL crowdfunding will close on June 24th, including all accredited and non-accredited offerings.
Invest today before it's too late!
Rarity of the day
Credits: Gerald Kuchling/Turtle Survival Alliance
Need an easy $14k?
You’ll just need a wetsuit, a camera, and a ticket to China’s Yangtze River.
That’s because last month, a local NGO offered a $14k cash reward in exchange for visual proof of a wild Yangtze giant softshell turtle, the world’s largest freshwater turtle. The species is so rare, there’s now only one known specimen (Susu) who lives in captivity.
Of course, the internet being the internet, chaos and levity ensued, with folks sending in pictures of their pet turtles and the odd AI-enhanced whopper.
Today’s poll
Do you think regime change can ever work?
💪 Yes, if... (tell us!)
❌ No, because... (why?)
✍️ Other (write us!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think the US will join the Israel-Iran war?
🔥
Yes, Trump is going all in (62%)
⛔ No, he campaigned on the opposite (32%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (6%)
Your two cents:
🔥
W.H:
“Trump smells an easy win at low cost (no US casualties). He’ll pile on and then claim a won war was all his idea.”
✍️
C.S:
“If he goes to war, it will be the whole world that pays, as Iran could block the Strait of Hormuz, preventing 1/5 of oil consumed in the world from reaching its destination.”
⛔
J.S
: “The US will do everything except direct involvement. They will supply Israel with equipment, training, intel, etc. That way Trump can claim to have defeated Iran and also claim that US troops were not involved.”
✍️
E.H:
“Who can predict Trump's decisions!”
⛔
A.P:
“There will be mass protests if he sends Americans to die in a war we very clearly do not want.”