URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/world-reacts-to-epstein
Title: 🌍 World reacts to Epstein

Today’s briefing:
— Our world reacts to Epstein (again)
— New French award just dropped
— And the world’s ugliest lawn is…
Sponsored by:
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Two quick numbers to make you (or at least me?) feel old:
Spain’s Alcaraz, who just beat Djokovic to win the men’s Australian Open, was only four years old the
first
time Djokovic won the Open; and
Britain’s best new artist at the weekend’s Grammys (Olivia Dean) was only two when Beyoncé won her first of 35 trophies.
Anyway, we need to talk about how
the world is responding to the latest Epstein files
.
Number of the day
12.7%
That’s how quickly (annualised) Taiwan’s economy grew in Q4 last year, its fastest in decades amid record chip demand and US investment.
The Epstein files
Some 42 days after they were due, the US justice department finally shared
the latest Epstein files
on Friday, featuring three million pages, 180,000 images, and 2,000 videos.
While it all pours more sordid pressure on familiar US figures (Trump, Clinton, Gates, Musk, Summers, Lutnick and beyond), it's also reverberating around the world, starting in...
🇸🇰
Slovakia
The NATO ally's national security advisor and former foreign minister,
Miroslav Lajčák
, has finally now resigned after the latest dump revealed just how tight he was with Epstein — we're talking
texts
bantering about anything from females to Putin's foreign minister.
Significance
: Finally a head rolls, but not just any head: Lajčák was pro-engagement with Russia, and the right-hand-man to Slovakia's famously Putin-friendly leader, Robert Fico.
🇳🇴
Norway
This latest Epstein dump is huge news in Norway, where
the crown princess
(Mette-Marit) gets mentioned a thousand times! Turns out Norway’s future queen was close with Epstein, and even planned trips to his Palm Beach estate.
And as if the princess wasn’t enough, Norway's former prime minister and long-time head of the Council of Europe (
Thorbjørn Jagland
) also makes multiple appearances, seemingly acting as Epstein's go-between to the Kremlin.
Significance
: It's a big embarrassment for one of Europe's most respected monarchies, already facing a shock assault trial of the princess's son. As for Jagland, his Epstein advocacy for Russia will shine new light on his years at the heart of European power, where he long advocated to keep Putin inside European institutions, which brings us to…
🇷🇺
Russia
Putin himself gets mentioned 1,055 times, and Russia 5,876 times, whether it’s Epstein's supposed audiences with the Russian autocrat, unverified FBI informant claims that Epstein managed Putin's money, meetings to brief Putin's former UN ambassador (who later died a suspicious death), and even a 2015 Epstein email to an FSB-trained Putin insider (Sergei Belyakov) seeking help with a Russian woman blackmailing New York elites.
Significance
: While last year’s Epstein dump fuelled Israel speculation, this latest edition has prompted the head of Estonia's parliamentary committee on foreign affairs to
suggest
Epstein was running honeytrap operations for Russian intelligence, a theory now also
pondered
by Poland's foreign minister. Meanwhile…
🇨🇳
China
The Middle Kingdom isn’t centre stage, though there are interesting snippets, whether it's former Trump aide Steve Bannon boasting about
a
) his own role in Trump's China tariffs, or
b
) getting an Australian billionaire to run anti-China ads in 2019 elections Down Under.
Interestingly, Harvard's student paper has also
detailed
Epstein's efforts to help Beijing's elite Tsinghua University (President Xi’s alma mater) establish a campus in Boston.
Significance
: There's a bit of online schadenfreude in China that maybe the worst you can say about China's own elites here is they should've known better than to go via Epstein. It hints at the way this sordid saga trashes international perceptions of Western power.
🇮🇳
India
Delhi's foreign ministry has come out firing after an Epstein email vaguely seemed to claim credit for the success of Modi's historic first visit to Israel in 2017 — Delhi's statement
dismisses
it all as "
trashy ruminations by a convicted criminal
".
Significance
: Plausibility aside, India's opposition is seizing on it, along with Epstein’s correspondence both with a member of India's richest family (Ambani) and current oil minister (Puri). Meanwhile, the timing is tricky ahead of Modi's next Israel visit this month.
🇨🇦
Canada
We recently described Canada as
the Ned Flanders of neighbours
, and boy did Canada hold up its end here: its only substantive appearance seems to be a letter in which Canada's LA consulate tells Epstein he's banned from visiting. You see? You can just say no.
Anyway, this is just scratching the surface — bravado or something else,
there's not enough internet
to cover all the angles, whether it's Epstein pondering investments in Somaliland, or texting with Dubai's powerful Sultan Ahmed bin Sulayem, or implying he could jailbreak someone in Assad's Syria, or the suggestion of tapping ex-MI6 figures to recover Libya’s frozen state assets.
Intrigue’s Take
There are so many takeaways, but let’s look at two:
First
, it’s a reminder that while we at Team Intrigue cut our teeth on the more formal side of diplomacy, states often seek to operate via
unofficial social brokers
— Epstein had no formal job title, but had half the world’s governments on speed dial.
Second
, we’ve looked at the ways this scandal ripples across geography, but it’s
rippling across time
, too: drawing links to any impending US hit on Iran, Serbia’s leader (Vučić) just blamed his country’s 1999 demise at NATO’s hands not on Belgrade’s own disastrous policy of ethnic cleansing, but on Clinton’s attempts to distract attention from Lewinsky. Ie, Epstein is now even playing into ongoing Serbian revisionism.
Anyway, given this predator’s weird ability to collect world leaders like they’re Pokémon, something tells us there’ll be more ripples to come.
Sound even smarter:
The UK’s former ambassador to the US (Mandelson) is running out of posts to resign, but amid the latest Epstein release he’s just resigned from the UK’s ruling Labour Party too.
Today’s newsletter is sponsored by
The Pint
Tired of doom and gloom ragebait from the mainstream media? Then you should check out our friends over at The Pint.
Join 13k+ getting the latest politics & business news through memes and unhinged commentary.
Every Friday in your inbox.
Subscribe for free.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES — Selloff.
Markets in Asia have taken a beating today (Monday), with key indices in Korea and Indonesia each down 5%, Hong Kong down 3%, and China down 2%. Commodity markets also plunged from their Thursday night highs, with gold and silver each crashing by double-digits. (
Reuters
)
Comment
: Friday’s immediate trigger seems to have been President Trump’s nomination of the relatively hawkish Kevin Warsh as his next Fed chair, a conventional choice jolting investors to haul their cash out of sky-high safe-havens.
🇮🇱
ISRAEL — Strikes, opening.
A day before Sunday’s partial reopening of Gaza’s Rafah crossing for the first time in two years, Israel carried out several airstrikes across the Strip, with scores reported dead. Israel says the hits were in response to violations by Hamas, which is in turn urging the US to intervene. (
BBC
)
🇷🇺
RUSSIA — Breaking promises.
Days after President Trump suggested Putin would halt energy attacks for a week during Ukraine’s harsh winter, a Russian drone has hit a bus carrying Ukrainian energy workers, killing 12. (
France24
)
🇹🇯
TAJIKISTAN — Guns to the rescue.
With security incidents along the Tajik-Afghan border now happening almost daily, the Russia-led
Collective Security Treaty Organization
(CSTO, aka Russia’s NATO)
now says it’ll supply arms to help bolster Tajik defences. (
EurasiaNet
)
Comment:
CSTO’s remaining post-Soviet members will have questioned the bloc’s relevance ever since it did nothing to help Armenia in its territorial spat with non-member Azerbaijan. So with Armenia now bailing, the real point of this arms pledge is presumably just to demonstrate CSTO’s value to the rest.
🇰🇭
CAMBODIA
— Too late to join?
Nearly half a century after first signing on, Cambodia has finally now
ratified
the UN’s key maritime law treaty (UNCLOS). (
SCMP
)
Comment:
Why now? With Cambodia’s big Thailand spat still simmering away, it reportedly fretted the Thai navy might cut its supply lanes, so formalising this treaty is probably a way to double down on every available protection.
🇨🇺
CUBA — Help is on the way.
Days after confirming she’d halted oil shipments to Cuba, Mexico’s President Sheinbaum has announced new humanitarian aid for Cuba. (
AP
)
Comment:
It’s a way to maintain Mexico’s traditional solidarity with Cuba without crossing Trump’s presumed new red lines about propping up the regime with oil.
🇮🇶
IRAQ — Gone too soon.
It seems President Trump’s new special envoy for Iraq (Mark Savaya) has already left the role amid rising US-Iraq tensions — it’s unclear why, though the folks at Reuters suggest it might’ve been Savaya’s failure to stop Iran-friendly powerbroker al-Maliki returning to Iraq’s prime ministership. (
Reuters
)
Comment:
Trump 2.0 had some early wins in Iraq, whether freeing Russian-Israeli researcher Elizabeth Tsurkov, or helping de-fang Iran-backed militias, but DC now faces the same structural headwinds past administrations have hit.
Extra Intrigue
🤣
Your weekly roundup of the world’s lighter news…
An Australian man has edged out the competition to take the title of
World’s Ugliest Lawn
.
A toymaker has accidentally
created the bestseller
for China’s Year of the Horse, mistakenly printing a toy horse’s smile upside down to produce the must-have “
crying horse
”.
Someone has turned an ol’ abandoned English cinema into a
graveyard for hundreds of expired Dyson
vacuum cleaners.
A British inventor has modified a
trashcan to reach speeds of up to 105kph
(79mph).
And US college students are
asking AI for help
to make it look like they’re not asking AI for help.
Award of the day
Credits: @FrenchEmbassyZA, X
France has been ninja-starring awards out these days
— Victoria Beckham just got made a
Knight of the Order of Arts and Letters
last week, and Pharrell Williams became a
Chevalier of the Légion d’honneur
too.
But have you heard of
Ali Akbar Akbar
(above)? President Macron just awarded him the
National Order of Merit
in a shout-out to the half century he’s spent hawking papers on the streets of Paris, including to Macron himself during his student days. The French head of state put it like this:
“You are the accent of the sixth arrondissement, the voice of the French press on Sunday mornings. And every other day of the week, for that matter.”
Today’s poll
What do you think will be the global impact from this latest Epstein dump?
🔪 Heads will roll
🤷 Nothing will change
🕴️ More scrutiny of shady brokers
🗣️ Populism will thrive as backlash against elites
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Last Thursday’s poll:
What do you think are the main international implications from recent ICE headlines?
✅
Nothing, they're just headlines (18%)
😶
A temporary hit to US standing (38%)
❌
This is a big deal (42%)
✍️ Other (write us!) (2%)
Your two cents:
❌
L.D:
“Points to the difficulties of trying to implement immigration control, which is something many countries want to do.”
✍️
K.P:
“It might be a big deal for popular opinion, but it won't influence the higher level diplomacy too much in the near future.”
😶
R.N: “The power of the image of America is strong but it won’t last forever. Course correct now to avoid locking in the damage permanently.”