URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/worlds-worst-central-banker-arrested-lebanon
Title: 🌍 ‘World’s worst central banker’ arrested in Lebanon

IN TODAY’S EDITION
1️⃣ World’s worst central bank governor?
2️⃣ A diplomatic leak!
3️⃣ Christmas in… October?
Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
The other day I was chuffed to receive an invite to join a popular podcast… in Spanish! It’s co-hosted by Nathán Wolfe (Mexico’s former ambassador to Singapore) and Pedro Zurita (who runs a big maps store and Instagram page in Spanish, with 70k followers).
Per the show’s theme, we focussed on some of the world’s lesser-known corners, like the Cocos Islands and the Torres Strait. Anyway, if you don’t speak Spanish but would like to hear a foreigner speak truly superb Spanish, have a listen on
Apple
and
Spotify
. Oh… you
do
speak Spanish? Well lemme just say… perdón por mi
horrible
español.
Anyway, today’s briefing brings you the intriguingly true tale of the ‘
world’s worst central banker
’, who just got arrested in Lebanon.
THE HEADLINES
Biden reportedly preparing to block Nippon Steel deal.
US Steel shares have dropped 17% after reports emerged the US president is
preparing to kill a merger
between the historic US steelmaker and Japan’s Nippon Steel. US Steel reps say if the deal
doesn’t
go through, the company might be forced to shut down some of its plants. Democratic nominee Kamala Harris and Republican nominee Donald Trump have both opposed foreign ownership of US Steel, which is headquartered in Pennsylvania (a key swing state).
China pledges billions for Africa.
President Xi Jinping has
promised $50B in loans, financing, and aid
over the next three years at this week’s Forum on China-Africa Cooperation in Beijing. As China’s economy sputters, Xi has used the summit to draw a contrast with the West, saying “
the Western modernisation process has brought profound suffering to the vast majority of developing countries.
”
Zelensky to appoint former Turkey envoy as foreign minister.
Andrii Sybiha, Ukrainian ambassador to Turkey (2016-2022) and then a presidential advisor and vice-minister, is expected to
replace Dmytro Kuleba as foreign minister
, according to a Telegram announcement. It’s part of President Zelensky’s biggest cabinet reshuffle since Russia began its full-scale invasion.
US accuses Russia of election meddling.
The US has accused Russian state-funded media outlets of embarking on a concerted
campaign to influence US voters
, including by recruiting “
unwitting American influencers
”. The treasury department also sanctioned the editor-in-chief of Russia’s
RT
network plus nine other employees.
Haiti expands state of emergency.
The newly-installed transitional government has expanded its emergency order to
cover the entire territory
, as armed gangs attempt to expand beyond the country’s capital. Meanwhile, US Secretary of State Antony Blinken is scheduled to land in Haiti today (Thursday) - the US is the main funder behind the UN-backed security mission now operating in-country.
TOP STORY
‘World’s worst central banker’ arrested in Lebanon
Lebanon’s former central bank chief, Riad Salameh.
It’s always good to be remembered for the things you accomplish in life, right? Less so if those accomplishments include international media outlets dubbing you the ‘World’s Worst Central Banker’, plus now a jail stint in Lebanon.
On Tuesday, authorities arrested Lebanon’s ex-central bank chief Riad Salameh in Beirut and charged him with
the embezzlement of $42M
.
Riad and his brother Raja are known to investigators everywhere
.
In fact, there must be faded photos of the duo pinned to corkboards in at least seven Western capitals, where we assume grizzled investigators with complex backstories have been taking long drags on cigarettes while figuring out how these two brothers hid
up to $300M
across a maze of international bank accounts. France and Germany even issued warrants for Riad’s arrest last year, and the US, UK and Canada have all slapped sanctions.
But who exactly is Riad Salameh?
Son of a hotelier, he studied at the American University of Beirut before making a name for himself at US investment bank Merrill Lynch. There, he got to know a certain Lebanese businessman, Rafic Hariri, and began managing his portfolio.
Rafic Hariri
. Does that name ring a bell?
Hariri went on to become Lebanon’s prime minister after the country’s civil war, and when he needed to appoint a central bank governor, it turns out he knew a guy: Riad Salameh. Hariri was later assassinated (a UN-backed
probe
blamed Hezbollah), but Salameh stayed on as central bank chief from 1993 until 2023!
And when reflecting on such a marathon innings, the classic
Batman
quote comes to mind: “
You either die a hero or you live long enough to become the villain
”.
Salameh initially earned cred for stabilising the country’s economy. There were even fan-boys at the IMF during the 2008 global financial crisis, with one senior official there
marvelling
, “
you could have thought [Salameh] had a crystal ball
”.
But did the good times last?
No, dear Intriguer, they did not.
A crisis started engulfing the Lebanese economy from 2019, plunging millions into poverty:
Lebanon’s economy has since
halved
Inflation peaked at 269% last year (it’s still around 35% now)
The lira has lost 98% of its value, and
Desperate folks even started
robbing banks
… to get
their own money
.
How’d it get so bad?
The
short
answer is a healthy mix of ineptitude, corruption, and intrigue. The slightly longer answer is that Lebanon had been borrowing beyond its means, lost crucial Gulf support due to Iran’s hold on Hezbollah (and Hezbollah’s hold on Lebanon), and then faced a severe liquidity crisis.
So from 2016, Salameh started luring
fresh US dollar deposits
with the promise of sky-high returns. This seemed to work on paper, if not for the exorbitant amounts the Lebanese central bank now owed its depositors. But instead of then reining in spending, politicians doled out big pay rises ahead of the 2018 election, and later tried to balance the books with a tax on (among other things) WhatsApp calls!
The sheer absurdity of the idea, coupled with a long-held sense of
outrage at a system favouring the elites
, triggered mass protests and plunged the country into a political and economic crisis that still persists today.
And so now, let’s close with another classic quote, this time from Warren Buffett: “
Only when the tide goes out do you discover who's been swimming naked.
”
Yes, dear Intriguer. As Lebanon’s tide has receded, the astonishing allegations suggest Riad Salameh wasn’t even wearing sunblock.
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
Like many of the folks running Lebanon lately, Salameh was long seen as untouchable. Even as all the accusations piled up, it was hard to see anything ever actually happening.
So then…
what changed?
Well this is just a temporary detention for now, so maybe nothing will change in the end.
But also… we couldn’t help but notice that the world’s main financial crimes watchdog (FATF) just started
threatening
to add Lebanon to its money laundering ‘
grey list
’. And one of the factors that FATF weighs up in this process is whether countries are properly prosecuting financial crimes.
Now, Lebanon already has a tough recovery ahead, but it looks impossible if it gets grey-listed by FATF (your list of willing business partners really shrinks).
So it wouldn’t surprise us if Beirut was now throwing Salameh
under the FATF bus
to avoid a grey-listing. Whatever the reason, Lebanon’s people will be happy to see a dash of accountability.
Also worth noting:
Prosecutors are also saying Salameh was using elaborate financial chicanery to hide vast losses caused by his reckless monetary policies. Salameh denies the charges, and says he got wealthy from his Merrill Lynch days, plus a bit of family money.
Oh, and speaking of central bankers in trouble: Libya’s central bank chief has now
fled to Turkey
, after finding himself at the centre of a power struggle between the two rival regimes now running Libya.
Check out our Intrigue merch!
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇰🇵
North Korea
: Reports have emerged in South Korean media that their authoritarian neighbours to the North
executed up to 30 high-ranking officials
as punishment for flood damage in late July. Supreme leader Kim Jong Un was quick to blame local officials in the flood’s aftermath, though some experts doubt whether he also executed them.
🇩🇪
Germany
: The Deutsche Bank CEO has told Germans they’ll have to
“work more and harder”
to restore the country’s economy, warning that investors are doubting Germany’s willingness and ability to reform. The bank chief also warned that recent political victories by “
parties with extreme positions
” could hurt Germany’s investment attractiveness.
🇲🇾
Malaysia
: Malaysia’s foreign ministry has launched an investigation into the
leaking of a classified note
which has now appeared in Philippines media.
The Inquirer
has reported that the two-page note, first lodged by China’s foreign ministry, asserted that Malaysia's oil and gas exploration in the South China Sea violated China's sovereignty.
🇨🇦
Canada
: A small political party helping keep Justin Trudeau’s minority government in power has now unexpectedly withdrawn its support. It’s a
political setback for Trudeau
, who’ll now have to find support among opposition lawmakers to pass budgets and survive confidence votes ahead of elections due by October 2025.
🇩🇯
Djibouti
: Djibouti says it expects landlocked Ethiopia to accept its offer for
“100% management”
of a local port
, granting it direct-sea access in a bid to ease tensions in the region. Ethiopia sparked a row in January after announcing plans for a port deal with Somaliland, a semi-autonomous region which Somalia considers its own.
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Just a few jobs we thought you might like…
Trainee, Brussels Forum 2025 @
German Marshall Fund
in Brussels
Project Manager @
Formula 1
in London
Philanthropy Executive @
World Wide Fund for Nature
in Singapore
Emerging Markets Associate @
Federal Reserve Bank
in New York
FESTIVITY OF THE DAY
This highly advanced graphic design job was done by the team at Intrigue
What do tacky interior décor companies and Venezuelan strongmen have in common? They’re both starting Christmas earlier and earlier each year.
Venezuela’s dictator Nicolás Maduro has told audiences tuning into his ‘
More with Maduro
’ TV show that the holiday season will commence on 1 October this year. He’s even promised to sign an official decree to really dial that festive cheer all the way up to 11.
Why? We’ve got two guesses: either this is a transparently desperate ploy from a dictator who can feel the power slipping from his grasp and so is attempting to hold onto it by way of distraction. Or maybe the guy just
really
loves Christmas. Who knows.
DAILY POLL
In the event of an economic meltdown like Lebanon's, where would you keep your savings?
🏦 The bank
📈 The stock market
🏠 Real estate
💸 Cash
👑 Gold
₿ Crypto
💱 Foreign currencies
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think states should help struggling companies?
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ 🛡️ Yep, everyone's now doing it (10%)
🟨
🟨
🟨
⬜️⬜️⬜️
🤔
Yep, but only under certain conditions (tell us which!) (34%)
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
🟩
⚖️ Nope, let the market figure it out (54%)
⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️⬜️ ✍️ Other (write in!) (2%)
Your two cents:
🤔
S.V:
“
CHIPS Act
in the US,
Make in India
in India, etc. They are all aimed to protect and enhance national interests.”
⚖️ S.S:
“If your business is failing, either nobody wants your product or your management is incompetent. The government can't fix this.”
✍️
D.D:
“Determining the conditions and the extent of the support is the tricky part.”
⚖️ A:
“A $5B profit per quarter is not a threshold that could justify the state stepping in to keep a company operational, work it out, folks!”
Was this forwarded to you? We're a team of ex-diplomats producing a concise and engaging geopolitical briefing for 100k+ leaders each day.
It’s free to subscribe
.