URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/you-need-to-know-about-this-communist-meeting
Title: 🌍 You need to know about this Communist meeting

Today’s briefing:
— An epic Communist meeting
— Worst security job ever?
— It’s all about the coin
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. To close out your week, today’s briefing will get you right up to speed on… a meeting! But not just any meeting, dear Intriguer. We’re talking
the fourth plenary session of the 20th Central Committee of the Communist Party of China
which, wow, really doesn’t make this briefing sound any cooler does it.
But I promise it is, and it actually reminds me of a true story about diplomatic absurdity: an ol’ embassy colleague once arrived at a big summit being run by a notoriously chaotic government — the local hosts advised that unfortunately, he wasn’t allowed inside unless he could show written authorisation from the embassy he was representing.
So my colleague returned a few minutes later brandishing a hand-written note he had just scribbled in the bathroom, declaring he was himself from the embassy, and was hereby formally authorising himself to attend the summit. And you know what? They let him in.
P.S
: We’re hosting a happy hour with Leadership Connect on December 4th in Washington, DC.
In town? Join us!
Number of the day
80
That’s how many years the UN Charter has been in effect, with 24 October now commemorated as United Nations Day each year.
Red flags.
There ain’t no party like the Communist Party.
Impressive interior décor?
Check
.
Carefully choreographed proceedings?
Cheque
.
Tasteful flower displays?
Czech
.
Wedding planners could really learn a thing or two, because whatever the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) lacks in letting you cast your vote, speak your mind, or choose your faith, it over-compensates with
truly excellent organisational skills
, as we saw in its conclave of ~315 top Party cadres at this week’s fourth plenum in Beijing.
It’s a semi-annual affair, with seven
plenums
(or plena
🤓
) typically held every five years. The idea is to set China’s direction on the big issues, with this latest plenum focused on finalising the next big five-year plan (2026-2030).
And while this stuff is
ultra-secretive
(the Jingxi Hotel is walled off like Wonka’s factory), and
dense
(even the English versions need translation), it’s all worth your attention because these obscure decisions can ripple around the world.
So, here are the most intriguing bits, framed like a wedding for some reason:
The invitations (military purge)
Nailing down that wedding guest list is often the hardest part — what if Uncle Gus does his Nixon impression again! But it’s easy if you’re Xi Jinping, who uninvited (fired) nine of his most powerful military officers just days before the plenum kicked off.
He even ditched He Weidong, vice-chair of China’s powerful Central Military Commission — and to give you an idea of how big a deal that is, the chair is Xi himself!
So why this epic purge?
The official reason was corruption, and “
severely undermining
” the Party’s highest ranks (aka Xi), all plausible claims in the sense that the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) does have a massive corruption problem.
But the opacity of it all means the void gets filled with speculation of some kind of power struggle, particularly when you look at who got promoted to replace him: a guy called Zhang Shengmin, who was the PLA’s own head of anti-corruption. In a toxic workplace, the best way to avoid getting thrown under the bus is to drive it.
Anyway, this latest plenum had the lowest attendance since Mao’s days, with dozens of cadres missing, so maybe Xi’s crackdown / paranoia is broader than anyone realises?
Champagne on arrival (
domestic demand
)
The 5,000-word
communiqué
reiterates familiar messaging about China’s need to boost
domestic
demand — an external (export-heavy) strategy is risky in a trade war. But there’s still no real detail on
how
Xi might ramp demand up at home. That’s possibly because he doesn’t know how (China’s economy is like no other), or he
does
know how but doesn’t like the required trade-offs (like more debt and/or less control).
Canap
é
s (
tech self-reliance
)
The communiqué also pledges
“substantial improvements in
scientific and technological
self-reliance and strength”
, particularly in areas where the US now has real leverage (chips, AI, aerospace, etc). So expect China to lean even harder into industrial policy and import substitution through 2030, which also means tougher times ahead for any economy (
cough
Germany
cough
) still relying on selling value-added stuff to China. Now time for…
Fish or chicken (
military
)
The cadres emphasised the PLA’s dual need for…
a)
combat preparedness
— it’s a reference to the fact that, beyond water-cannoning Philippine sailors and flare-dropping Australian pilots, the PLA hasn’t seen much action since Deng lost 20,000 men in his disastrous 1979 invasion of Vietnam. And…
b)
intelligentization
— that looks to us like incorporating the brutal lessons from Putin’s flailing if deadly invasion of Ukraine (AI, autonomous systems, etc), because you can bet Taiwan is already eyeing the same asymmetric potential of drones.
And now, before you start trying to hail that Uber, don’t forget the…
Sorbet (
APEC
)
Beijing and DC are due to resume trade talks in Malaysia today (Friday), before Xi and Trump meet in South Korea just ahead of the big Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) summit next Friday (Oct 31) and Saturday (Nov 1), though nothing is locked yet.
Intrigue’s Take
As we foreshadowed earlier in the week, this plenum’s overall vibe was one of
doubling down
on stability and self-sufficiency amid all the “
raging storms
” on the horizon.
But the biggest — and least answerable — question is still really what’s up with this accelerating purge at the very top of the PLA.
Aside from any specific, murky power struggle, it could actually just be the
natural symptom of Xi’s own authoritarianism
: each enemy you purge just creates more enemies, inviting more paranoia, and in turn spurring more purges.
It’s also this very same authoritarian system —
including Xi’s own anti-corruption drive
— that arguably just creates endless opportunities (and even obligations!) for corruption. Hook a brother up and maybe we’ll just focus our investigation on the next cubicle.
It’s like trying to treat an infection when the medicine itself is infected.
Sound even smarter:
China’s five-year plan is typically released at its quasi-parliamentary sitting in March.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇨🇦
CANADA — US suspends trade talks.
President Trump has again suspended trade talks with Canada over an anti-tariff advertisement run by the province of Ontario, featuring edited footage of President Reagan dunking on tariffs. (
Independent
)
Comment
: Canada’s Carney had just stabilised his rapport with Trump, in hopes of stabilising Canada’s trade ties with the US. The joys of a federal system.
🇮🇪
IRELAND — And the president is…
Irish voters head to the polls today (Friday) to elect their 10th president (a mostly ceremonial role). Left-leaning independent parliamentarian Catherine Connolly, known partly for her criticism of NATO / the EU, looks set to win. (
Irish Times
)
🇨🇳
CHINA — Not at that price.
There are industry reports that China’s state oil giants like PetroChina, Sinpec, CNOOC, and Zhenhua are already halting their seaborne Russian oil purchases amid this week’s latest US sanctions on Rosneft and Lukoil, with India’s majors likely to follow suit. (
The Straits Times
)
Comment:
Putin is claiming these US sanctions “will not significantly impact our economic wellbeing”, but this week’s 7% price spike disagrees. There’s a degree of delusion and bluster, but it also reflects hopes his oil keeps reaching buyers via intermediaries.
🇱🇹
LITHUANIA  — High flying.
Vilnius has hauled in a local Russian diplomat to protest after two of the Kremlin’s fighter jets entered Lithuanian (aka NATO) airspace for 18 seconds yesterday (Thursday). The SU-30 jets crossed over from Russia’s Kaliningrad exclave, prompting NATO to scramble Spanish Eurofighter Typhoons. (
France24
)
Comment
: Kazakhstan also tightened its airspace yesterday after a drone of "unknown origin" exploded near its border with Russia.
🇲🇾
MALAYSIA
— Come one, come all.
The annual ASEAN summit of Southeast Asian leaders kicks off in Kuala Lumpur on Sunday, with word it might be a tad more consequential than usual: President Trump is set to witness Cambodia and Thailand signing their peace accord. Other high-profile leaders like India’s Modi, Russia’s Putin, and Myanmar’s junta leader (Hlaing) are skipping the summit. (
Anadolu Agency
) And speaking of Sunday…
🇦🇷
ARGENTINA — Will he? Won’t he?
It’s not every day the world holds its breath for mid-term elections in Argentina, but we’ll be watching this Sunday as voters decide whether President Milei gets enough seats to defend his veto, lock in Trump’s $20B-40B currency swap, and continue his austerity project aimed at ending Argentina’s default cycle. (
Reuters
)
Comment
: Interestingly, Milei is scheduled to meet JP Morgan boss Jamie Dimon, who’s in town for a conference. A photo op with that kind of Wall St star-power might offer a dash of pre-election credibility for his tough economic program, as polls suggest Sunday could come down to the wire.
🇳🇪
NIGER — Taken.
Someone has kidnapped a US missionary just a few blocks from Niger’s presidential palace, with local diplomats reporting he’s been taken to the western Tillaberi region where jihadis are known to operate. (
Al Jazeera
)
Extra Intrigue
Three stories we couldn’t shoehorn in this week
🥾
Counter-narcotics:
Armed groups in Colombia have seemingly
built themselves a mini-airforce
, with drones hitting a police chopper and even a warship in recent weeks.
France:
The rotating security detail protecting former president Nicolas Sarkozy will be
in prison with him
for the duration of his five-year campaign finance offence sentence (he’s already received a death threat from a fellow prisoner).
Sports:
US authorities have
arrested dozens
(including a Miami Heat guard and the Portland Trail Blazers coach) on allegations of faking injuries to rig sports betting, and/or using high-tech contact lenses to rig poker games!
Coin of the day
Credits: Bundesministerium der Finanzen
We’ve kept you posted on how silver prices have gone bonkers this year (up ~62%), but that’s leading to some unexpected outcomes…
For example, Germany was meant to be releasing
special new commemorative silver coins
in January (see above), but that idea is now on hold because at current prices, the cost of making each coin now exceeds its face value!
And while we’ve got your attention, did you notice the sneaky elephant in the bottom left? Last we checked, majestic elephants weren’t roaming the Schwarzwald. Rather, it’s a shout-out to Tuffi, Germany’s famous circus elephant who escaped from a 1950 monorail publicity stunt in Weppertal only to plunge 12m / 39ft into the river below (she survived!).
Friday’s quiz
It’s Global Media and Information Literacy Week!
How many countries score higher than 80 on the Press Freedom Index?
Where 100 is complete media freedom.
18
28
48
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
What percentage of adults are concerned by their ability to determine what is true and fake in online news?
According to the 2025 Digital News Report
24%
41%
58%
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
When did the UN General Assembly establish media literacy week?
1978
2010
2021
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate