URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/you-might-ve-missed-something-733dc892a73b80cb
Title: 🌍 You might’ve missed something

Today’s briefing:
— You might’ve missed something
— Stopover denied!
— They’re making an emoji for
that
?!
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. I’ve been on the road this last little while and rather successfully tuning out of the news — perhaps like many of you, dear Intriguers?
In many ways, not much has changed in the groundstrokes of what’s happening worldwide. Conflicts ensue with dim prospects of an end in sight, markets respond to geopolitical volatility, and one world leader’s been caught on camera rolling their eyes at another world leader mid-convo. You know, the usual.
To fill in the details of all that’s happened recently and that we’ve perhaps skipped over in the dog days of summer, I’m delighted to take us for
a roundup of three curious stories
that you may have missed. Let’s dive in.
Number of the day
50+
That’s how many return flights Russian carrier Aeroflot had to cancel on Monday after pro-Ukraine hackers claimed responsibility for a massive cyberattack.
Did you miss this?
To mix things up, we thought you’d enjoy three sneaky stories you might’ve missed, and what they could tell us about our world. So strap in and join us to start off in…
Europe’s next top (banking) model.
Heard of
DNB Carnegie
? You get a pass because it was only born via a merger in May, but the Stockholm-based player is now Europe’s top bank for IPOs, according to new Bloomberg data. It’s #2 (behind Citi) if you include Europe, the Middle East, and Africa.
Now, this isn’t a merger story — even combined, Norway’s DNB and Sweden’s Carnegie were back in the IPO little leagues last year. Rather,
this is a Scandinavia story
: sure, the region has a long history of banking. Heck, there’s a whole subplot in
Love is Blind Sweden
: can Meira see past Oskar’s finance bro vibes and embrace his warmth within?
But now in 2025, the region has raised a third of all Europe’s IPOs.
Why?
It’s a mix of smart banks, deep capital markets, friendly macro conditions, and rebounding investor sentiment as a rich pipeline of IPO-ready firms senses its moment.
But who cares?
We see two possible lessons:
Economically
, it’s a quiet shift in Europe’s centre of gravity away from traditional centres down south to a more agile, tech-enabled, and politically stable north, and
Politically
, it’s the north’s fiscal discipline, institutional credibility, and centrist pragmatism as a counterweight to the volatile populism brewing down south.
Temple and state.
Heard of
Shi Yongxin
? He’s China’s most famous monk, as the abbot of the legendary Shaolin Temple. But now he’s under investigation for embezzling temple funds and fathering kids with mistresses.
Who cares?
Here are some possible lessons:
China’s faith figures live off
borrowed legitimacy
: the state giveth and the state taketh away; blessed be the name of the state. But it’s not just faith…
China’s elites are
only ever a mistake awa
y from the edge, whether you’re a mogul like Jack Ma, a minister like Qin Gang, or a ‘CEO Monk’ like Shi Yongxin.
Hit that subscribe button!
Heard of
IShowSpeed
? Aka Speed? Aka 20-year-old Darren Watkins Jr from Cincinnati? No? Well first, congratulations on being older than 23! But second, he’s a world-famous YouTube streamer who’s just wrapped a Europe tour, generating 2.5 billion views!
Lithuania
’s economy minister met him on the tarmac with fresh beetroot shots
He did a backflip at
Latvia
’s monument to independence (from Russia), and
So many fans rushed to see him in
Estonia
, they
collapsed
a harbourside pier!
And that was just the three Baltics which (thanks to a private jet) he visited in 7.5 hours, live-streaming as he swept castles, threw spears, and battled knights. Then his entourage whisked him away to Poland, where he went extra viral by lifting a Mazda MZ-5.
Who cares?
Two possible lessons:
In the emerging media landscape, it’s all about ties of
trust and authenticity
, and Speed’s itinerary is a reminder that governments are willing pay for that, but
While there’s debate in the West around whether that’s
a worthy investment
, if you want to reach anyone under 23, a small honorarium is a no-brainer to us.
It’s also a no-brainer to China, where Speed’s March-April visit made content that went so viral (even at the above
Shaolin Temple
), the Party likened him to a modern Marco Polo! For Beijing, the debate is less whether he’s worth it, and more how to dial him up to 11: it’s now
inviting
foreign influencers with 300k subscribers or more on a 10-day journey.
Intrigue’s Take
So tying it all together, what can we learn about our world? Here are two possibilities:
Power is shifting
: whether that’s from south to north, old to young, or legacy to emerging, the common thread for the winners is
agility
. And…
Trust is footloose
: whether it’s investors trusting Scandinavian bankers or Gen Z trusting a shirtless streamer,
authenticity now
travels faster than authority. And that means legacy players, whether Citi, CNN, or Shaolin, need to keep up.
Sound even smarter:
Another story that caught our eye? Two European players (Portugal’s Galp and France’s Total) are gunning for oil megaprojects in Namibia, potentially adding the south-west African nation to the continent’s list of petrostates by the 2030s.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇨🇴
COLOMBIA
-
Guilty?
In a case that’s been running for 13 years, a court just found conservative former leader Álvaro Uribe guilty of trying to bribe a witness to retract damaging testimony about Uribe’s links to right-wing paramilitaries. Uribe will appeal what is now Colombia’s first major criminal conviction of a former leader. (
NYT
$)
Comment:
US Secretary of State Rubio has accused Colombia of weaponizing the judicial branch against a political foe, and we can’t help but wonder if this case (like the one against Bolsonaro in Brazil next door) will end up as a bilateral irritant.
🇹🇼
TAIWAN
-
No stopover for you.
DC has reportedly denied permission for Taiwan’s President Lai to stop in New York en route to diplomatic partners in Belize, Guatemala, and Paraguay. (
Newsweek
)
Comment:
It’s an attempt to avoid rocking the boat with China while trying to land a trade deal and possible Trump-Xi summit. The risk is, by implying US support for Taiwan is negotiable, you can weaken the kind of deterrence that’s so far helped avoid a war.
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
Make more babies!
China’s leadership has rolled out a $500 per year subsidy for every kid under three in an effort to boost population growth (aka curb population decline). (
DW
)
Comment
: The CCP’s one-child policy has left an enduring legacy the government is now trying to reverse. It’s a reminder the human spirit isn’t a tap you can turn on/off, though Korea’s possible success with pro-natalist policies suggests there are still things governments can do to incentivise and simplify family life.
🇷🇺
RUSSIA
-
Earlier the better.
President Trump has said he’s bringing forward his 50-day peace-or-sanctions deadline on Russia, reiterating he’s “
disappointed in President Putin
”. A precise timeline is still TBC, but the US president says the Kremlin now has less than two weeks to cut a deal before the US starts sanctioning anyone buying Russian oil. (
CNBC
)
🇺🇸
UNITED STATES
-
No thanks.
The US and Israel are skipping this week’s two-state solution UN conference, which focuses on recognising a Palestinian state, reforming the Palestinian Authority, disarming Hamas, and normalising Arab-Israeli ties. The official US statement describes the New York conference as a reward for terrorism. (
State Dept
)
Comment
: While speakers have mostly reiterated national positions, Palestinian prime minister Mohammad Mustafa generated headlines when (in addition to calling on Israel to withdraw from Gaza) he called on Hamas to disarm and surrender.
🇻🇪
VENEZUELA
-
No contest.
President Maduro has claimed a “
great victory
” after his party ✌️won✌️ almost all of Sunday’s 335 mayoral races. The divided opposition mostly boycotted the ballot in protest against Maduro’s regime. (
Colombia1
)
🇪🇬
EGYPT
-
Get outta my business.
In a notably blunt report, the International Monetary Fund has warned that Egypt’s military-controlled economic model is hobbling growth, by side-lining private players and distorting the market for investors. (
MEM
)
Comment
: That’s the trouble with tigers: once you let them in, they’re hard to get out.
Extra Intrigue
Here’s what people around the world are googling
🇨🇦
Canadians
searched for ‘
Tom Lehrer
’ as news broke the US
musical satirist and mathematician died
aged 97.
Sports fans in
🇸🇻
El Salvador
googled ‘
Eurocopa Femenina
’ (
Women’s Euro Cup
) after
England beat Spain
in the penalties to take the title.
And folks in
🇲🇾
Malaysia
looked up ‘
street photographers fined
’ after
police pinged unlicensed photographers
peddling pics to tourists in Kuala Lumpur.
Emojis of the day
Credit: Unicode Consortium
Wake up babe, new emojis just dropped.
And somehow Bigfoot made the cut?
Silicon Valley’s Unicode Consortium, an independent body that promotes cross-border texting standards, has approved a fresh batch of emojis for the upcoming iOS 26 update.
Among the new additions are an apple core, ballet dancers, an orca, a trombone, and a so-called ‘hairy creature’ (rather than bigfoot), presumably to maximise global resonance?
Sadly, still no mention of our emoji proposal: ‘junior diplomat getting yelled at because the minister wanted a baloney sandwich, not an abalone sandwich’.
Today’s poll
What do you think about the reported US decision to block the Taiwanese president's NYC transit?
👍 Good: poking China helps nobody
👎 Bad: appeasing China helps nobody
✍️ Other (write us!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think President Trump's trade strategy is working?
📈
Yes, here's why... (32%)
📉
No, here's why not... (65%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (3%)
Your two cents:
📉
M.S:
“Short-term revenues are no solace for long-term damage done to the US's reputation as a reliable negotiating partner and architect of the postwar globalized trade order.”
📈
W.L:
“They are. Other countries are on notice, and the real negotiations have just begun. A large market, such as the USA, is a significant player; therefore, producers worldwide need to recalibrate.”
✍️
W.H:
“Too early to say (but probably not). We still need to see: a) whether and how higher tariffs get passed down to the consumer, and b) how many of the medium/long term promised US investments actually materialize.”
✏️
Corrections corner
You can’t get anything past 140k Intriguers. It turns out yesterday’s zipline over live alligators is a first for
Morocco
, but not the world. Apparently, folks are already casually ziplining over ‘gators at least in
South Africa
and
Louisiana
!