URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/red
Title: 🌍 You need to know about this $8.5B deal

Today’s briefing:
— You need to know about this $8.5B deal
— This country wants a military
— Zombies spotted in…
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. Remember 2017? Fidget spinners went global, the Oscars announced the wrong winner, and KFC somehow started running out of chicken.
It was also the year the US not only got a new president, but a veeeery different one. An early example came barely a week into Trump’s first term, during what should’ve been a pretty routine call with one of America’s most steadfast allies: Australia.
Instead, things got heated, voices were raised, and names were called, until Trump reportedly hung-up barely 25 minutes into what he described as his “
worst call all day
”.
I mention all this because that former prime minister just gave full marks to the way his successor (Anthony Albanese) handled
Australia’s first White House meeting with Trump 2.0
. It has big implications, so shall we look at why?
Number of the day
10%
That’s how much Paris-based bank BNP Paribas saw its stocks fall Monday, after a US jury found it complicit in Sudan’s atrocities by helping prop up al-Bashir’s regime. The bank says it’ll appeal. Ousted in 2019, Bashir is still wanted by the International Criminal Court.
That’s not a knife
Australia’s Anthony Albanese doesn’t have too much in common with Donald Trump: a social housing upbringing vs a billionaire; decades in politics versus a recent outsider; and a centre-left leader versus more of a MAGA populist.
But ‘Albo’ (his nickname) and Trump just seemed to hit it off in DC, so here are their top four quotes you should know, and why:
“This is an $8.5B pipeline that we have ready to go” — Albanese
It’s a big deal, with the two allies jointly pledging to prioritise ~100 critical mineral and rare earth projects via a cool $1B each in the first six months alone. Why?
China
still controls most of the world’s supply for several inputs across tech, renewables, defence, and beyond. We’re even talking
virtually 100%
of the world’s refining capacity for some elements, whether terbium (heat-resistant alloys) or tungsten (missile bits).
And
Xi Jinping has already flexed that control
, imposing export rules on 18 elements this year alone in response to Trump’s tariffs. It’s basically a reminder he has veto power over entire Western supply chains for jets, radars, drones, and beyond. So play nice or else.
That’s
where the Aussies come in
: they’re not just sitting on the world’s fourth-largest rare earth reserves, but also expertise around refining, which China has spent decades perfecting (it’s a costly, multi-step, ultra-precise process requiring advanced metallurgical skills).
So this deal with Australia means Trump might enter his possible APEC meeting with Xi later this month
a little
less rattled by Xi’s rare earth stranglehold, even if it’ll take years and billions to actually break. Speaking of which…
“The Participants will work… within a pricing framework including price floors”
This line, buried deep in the above new US-Australia
framework
, reveals one key way the allies plan to break China’s bottleneck:
price floors
.
China dominates this sector because the West gave up decades ago: nobody could match China on price, so investors tapped out. That
price advantage
is the result of:
Yes, legit
strengths
optimised over decades, but also…
Government
help (subsidies) and indifference (lax environment rules), as well as…
Predatory
pricing and dumping (China once crashed prices 80% to tank a US mine).
So by promising a minimum purchase price, the US and Australia (plus unspecified “
international partners
”) want to de-risk this sector for investors to help ramp-up supply.
“Full steam ahead” – Trump
That’s how Trump referred to
AUKUS
, the
Australia-UK-US
pact to help Australia get nuclear-
propelled
subs with unparalleled range and stealth, meaning rivals never
really
know where they are.
The theory is it might help further nudge China — in the midst of a historic military build-up — to think twice before any big moves.
Of course, there were always some
big AUKUS questions
, which got even bigger under Trump 2.0 — Canberra became worried its ally might re-neg. But to the contrary, Trump just told Albanese, “
It was going too slowly. Now we’re starting, we have it all set.
”
“I don’t like you, and I probably never will” — Trump
That’s right… the US president directed
those spicy words
at Australia’s ambassador to the United States and former prime minister,
Kevin Rudd
!
Sure, Trump was responding to an Australian journalist who highlighted Rudd’s anti-Trump comments from years ago. And it was mercilessly brief, delivered with a grin, then drowned out by laughter.
But we’d say even the blanket coverage Down Under of Rudd’s quiet humiliation can’t dull the shine on what was otherwise a pretty successful visit for the Aussies.
Intrigue’s Take
One of the reasons we left the foreign service and founded Intrigue was we feared our world’s attention was increasingly absorbed by (say) the leader of the free world dunking on an ambassador, rather than (say) two allies inking a historic minerals deal.
But this Trump-Rudd moment does highlight a couple of things worth tackling briefly.
First
, it’s an example of how sometimes our
legacy media
friends can create the news (drawing Trump’s attention to Rudd’s comments) in hopes of firing up the rage cycle for another few clicks. It’s short-term profitable, but arguably long-term corrosive, not only to a legacy media already struggling with declining trust, but also a broader free world still struggling to meaningfully debate its own existential challenges.
Second
, this whole visit was also an example of how sometimes
partisan politics
can complicate good policy. The opposition in Australia has long dunked on Albanese’s seeming inability to land a meeting with Trump until now, but the timing (intentional or not) struck us as kinda shrewd: rather than go early but empty and risk another Oval Office ambush, the two sides spent months hammering out several deals, with the result that everyone (except maybe a certain ambassador) just walked away happy.
Sound even smarter:
The main omission was any US tariff relief for Australia, though Australia is already sitting on the 10% baseline. The Australians will also be relieved Trump didn’t target their government pharmaceutical scheme, which irks US big pharma.
Headlines have also highlighted an Australian pledge to boost their US investments to $1.4T by 2035, though it’s really just an aspiration or forecast from Australia’s $2.6T pension funds (which are mostly privately-managed).
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇯🇵
JAPAN
-
New prime minister.
The parliament (Diet) has just formally appointed Sanae Takaichi as Japan’s first female prime minister. (
Japan Today
)
Comment
: Japan’s markets have cheered her ascent, hitting new records today (Tuesday). It reflects not just her low-rate and high-growth preferences, but also relief after her Komeito coalition partner bailed, raising fears of more gridlock. She ended up getting over the line with new conservative partners, the Japan Innovation Party.
🇨🇳
CHINA
-
Let’s get this Party started.
The top leaders of China’s ruling Communist Party are gathered in Beijing for this week’s high-level ‘plenum’ that’ll map out China’s next five-year plan. (
AP
)
Comment
: This latest plenum will likely again emphasise continuity and stability, not just because of volatility abroad, but also tricky times at home. We’re talking both economically (growth just dipped) and politically (Xi just purged another nine top military officers including He Weidong, China’s second-top officer after Xi himself).
🇺🇦
UKRAINE
-
No chance.
President Trump has now suggested he doesn’t think Ukraine can win Putin’s war, though added “
anything is possible
”. His remarks come amid reports the US president again wants Kyiv to cede land for Putin to stop. Meanwhile, European leaders (including Ukraine’s Zelensky) have issued a joint statement backing an immediate freeze of battle lines for peace talks to get underway. (
EuroNews
)
Comment:
Trump’s next summit with Putin in Hungary might now be on hold, amid breaking reports the foreign minister-level planning dialogue has made little progress. If true, it’s unsurprising: Putin’s words and actions still point to a man who doesn’t want peace — the moment he stops attacking, he accepts strategic defeat (pariah status, a million casualties, and a broken economy, all for a failed invasion).
🇽🇰
KOSOVO
-
Building bridges?
Kosovo’s Western backers have criticised its plans to build two bridges in the country’s north, arguing it’s stoking tensions with a local Serb population that’s long resisted integration efforts pushed by Kosovo’s ethnic-Albanian majority. (
Bloomberg
$)
Comment
: If you’re wondering why Western capitals are weighing in here, it’s partly because there are
still
~5,000 NATO troops on the ground, a quarter century after the two communities fought a war. The odd and uneasy equilibrium in Kosovo’s north, where both Kosovo and Serbia exercise a kind of overlapping sovereignty, has been wobbling since at least 2021, reviving fears of conflict.
🇸🇧
SOLOMON ISLANDS
-
Need me one of those.
The government is mulling the creation of a national defence force, which would make it just the ~fourth Pacific Island nation to get a military. (
Asia Pacific Report
)
Comment
: It’s a tricky topic in the Solomons, where police were disarmed after a violent ethnic conflict in the early 2000s. And it’ll be a tricky topic for the broader region, given the idea first emerged after the then-leader returned from a visit to China, not long after signing his country’s infamous China security pact in 2022.
🇲🇬
MADAGASCAR
-
Swear it.
Michael Randrianirina, the colonel who led last week’s ousting of the president after weeks of protests, has now been sworn in as Madagascar’s new leader. (
Al Jazeera
)
Comment
: Shortly after we
explored
last week’s juicy developments, the African Union (the AU) went on to suspend Madagascar’s membership until constitutional order is restored. The AU has long had a strict anti-coup policy, but has wrestled internally with whether and how to apply it to these kinds of ‘popular coups’.
🇧🇷
BRAZIL
-
New drill.
State-owned oil company Petrobras just got regulatory consent for a new drilling project off the mouth of the Amazon after years of negotiations, and weeks out from Brazil’s 2025 COP climate summit. President Lula’s critics are dismissing his argument that oil revenues will help fund Brazil’s energy transition. (
Guardian
)
Extra Intrigue
The Intrigue commodities corner is back
Silver
: India’s biggest precious metal refinery has
run out of silver
for the first time, amid a seasonal buying frenzy exacerbated by rapidly rising prices and social media hype.
Gas
: A major Russian gas plant has had to
suspend imports from Kazakhstan
following another Ukrainian drone strike.
Coal
: China’s coal imports from Mongolia
hit a record high in September
as Beijing’s measures on overcapacity pushed up domestic coal prices.
March of the day
Pic from CRI
What started out as a small prank by a pack of nerds at the 2000 Gen Con gaming convention in Milwaukee, has now become an annual tradition in cities around the world.
We’re talking, of course, about
the Zombie Walk
, where folks dress like zombies then limp and lurch around town yelling “
braaaaiins
” at random pedestrians.
Several walks just took place on Saturday, including the above event in Mexico City featuring the traditional…
Michael Jackson Thriller Dance
!
Btw, if you’re interested in an international zombie movie, you can’t miss Korea’s hit 2016 film,
Train to Busan.
Today’s poll
Do you think this US-Aus deal will help break China's control over rare earths?
💵 Yes, especially with price controls
📟 No, the technology is still lagging
✍️ Other (write us!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Yesterday’s poll:
Do you think the French will get their jewels back?
👑
Yep, they'll stop at nothing (31%)
💰
Nope, those jewels are long gone (68%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (1%)
Your two cents:
💰
J.S:
“Au revoir jewels. Looking forward to seeing the movie at least.”
👑
M.S:
“They are determined and dogged and have the resources, plus it’s a national heritage issue.”
✍️
J.B:
“If the thieves break them up and sell the jewels over the coming years: unlikely. If the thieves were hired to keep the jewellery intact: it’s possible, as long as international investigators, especially art crime experts, cooperate!”