URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/friday-72c5
Title: 🌎 Your primer on this Sunday’s German elections

IN TODAY’S EDITION
1️⃣ Your primer ahead of Germany’s elections
2️⃣ Intrigue’s weekend tips
3️⃣ Meme of the day
Hi {{ First name | Intriguer }}.
In Washington DC, (almost) every person you meet has something to say about the state of the world. Some think we’re about to enter the golden age. Others are in despair and ready to escape it all by going ‘off-grid’ and moving to New Zealand (gotta love the Kiwis).
At a dinner last night, I met someone who shared their thoughts on how the world of 2025 bears a striking resemblance to the world pre-WWI. They claimed that back then, the world’s wealth was concentrated in elite pockets, and rival empires hung onto uneasy truces that were flimsily held together by increasingly irrelevant institutions.
I’ll be chewing on this idea as we head into the
first ‘big’ election of 2025 in Germany this weekend
, which is our lead story for today. Happy weekending, Intriguers!
THE HEADLINES
Zelensky calls world leaders.
The Ukrainian president has struck a conciliatory tone amid
a deepening rift with Donald Trump
, declaring “
together with America and Europe, peace can be more secure
”. His comments come after Trump’s special envoy Keith Kellogg arrived in Kyiv pledging to listen, while Zelensky also sought support in calls with the leaders of Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Norway and South Africa. Meanwhile, Trump is due to host France’s Macron on Monday, followed by the UK’s Starmer on Thursday.
Three empty buses explode near Tel Aviv.
Netanyahu has
ordered a military operation in the West Bank
after three empty buses exploded in a presumed terror attack near Tel Aviv. Meanwhile, Israel has identified the bodies returned by Hamas yesterday as Ariel (4) and Kfir Bibas (nine months old when abducted on 7 October 2023), but a
third body was not that of their mother Shiri
(32). Israel is demanding the return of her body, but Hamas has not yet commented.
Pope’s hospitalisation continues.
Pope Francis (88) has apparently seen
a slight improvement in his condition
after entering hospital a week ago with bronchitis that then became pneumonia, though he’s cancelled all weekend appointments as his hospitalisation continues. Elsewhere in Europe, Spain’s high court has found former football chief Luis Rubiales
guilty of assaulting player Jenni Hermoso
when he kissed her without consent after the 2023 FIFA final.
US Senate confirms Kash Patel as FBI chief.
The Senate has confirmed Trump loyalist, former federal prosecutor, and fervent FBI critic
Kash Patel as the next FBI chief
in a narrow 51-49 vote. Kash later tweeted that his mission is to “
rebuild trust in the FBI
”, while opposition lawmakers say he’s been too political himself to serve in what’s meant to be an apolitical role.
Bolivia’s Evo Morales launches unconstitutional campaign.
Former Bolivian leader Evo Morales has
launched another election campaign
, defying constitutional term limits. He’s been holed up in the town of Cochabamba since authorities filed charges (which he denies) alleging human trafficking involving a minor.
TOGETHER WITH POLICYWARE
Online Course: Learn about the latest in US export controls and their foreign policy implications, March 3-28
Export controls are at the forefront of US efforts to slow China's development of AI, and other countries have joined this effort. US export controls are also rapidly expanding in scope. Starting March 5th, join world-leading expert Kevin Wolf in this online deep dive into export controls and their foreign policy implications. Flexible learning means time off from work is not required.
Learn more and enroll
TOP STORY
Your primer on this Sunday’s German elections
Campaign posters in Munich, snapped by Intrigue’s own Kristen Talman
Up to 60 million eligible voters will head to the polls in Germany to elect 630 members of the Bundestag this Sunday. Our very own Kristen has been on the ground (and speaks ze lingo), to get you what you need to know.
First,
the issues dominating the race
—
Immigration
.
Gone are the days when Angela Merkel declared
“Wir schaffen das!” (we can do it!)
as
she welcomed a million or more migrants fleeing war-torn Syria, Afghanistan, and beyond. In fact, some 68% of folks now believe Germany should now take in
fewer
migrants
, and the hardline populist
Alternative for Germany
(AfD) scored its first major win in 2017 after making that call early. These days, the need for some kind of immigration reform is arguably the one point all major political parties agree on, cemented by a recent string of violent attacks.
The economy
. Meanwhile,
households and businesses alike are pinching their pockets as record energy prices, historic auto layoffs, and competition from China all bite, while Bundesbank gurus have begun crunching the numbers on possible US tariffs,
foreshadowing
a more grim outlook ahead. That might explain why only 12.6% of German firms
expect things to get better this year
.
Ukraine
.
Relatedly, remember the
“Schuldenbremse”
? That’s the debt brake which limits Germany’s deficit (and therefore its ability to, say, invest in infrastructure or support Ukraine) to 0.35% of GDP. A dispute over that rule is what caused Germany’s coalition to collapse last year, leading to this Sunday’s elections. Most Germans still support backing Ukraine’s self-defence, but majorities have also typically seen the debt brake as sacrosanct, though polls suggest that’s easing.
And that leads us to the proposed answers
(listed in polling order)…
Christian Democrats (CDU/CSU), polling at 30%
The face of the party is
Friedrich Merz
,
widely tipped to end up as Germany’s next chancellor. So much so, in fact, that a moderator at last week’s Munich Security Conference even accidentally (?) introduced him as chancellor!
Under Merz’s leadership, the CDU has flagged an openness to easing the debt brake, while advocating for tougher migration laws, continued support for Ukraine, and reduced economic dependence on China (part of what he calls an
“axis of autocracies”).
Notable quote
:
"The most important strategic priority is (...) the restoration of deterrence and defence capabilities"
Alternative for Germany (AfD), polling at 21%
The face of the AfD is
Alice Weidel
, an ex-banker with a PhD in international development who’s fluent in Mandarin (and English), and is raising two sons with her Sri Lankan-born film-maker wife in Switzerland. Now, that’s the type of bio you might assume leans left, but Weidel’s nationalist-populist platform has included:
Closed borders and “
remigration
” (understood to mean deportations)
A German exit from the Paris climate pact and even the EU itself (though Weidel has semi-walked back the latter)
No touching the debt brake, plus
Halting aid to Ukraine while also resuming purchases of Russian gas.
All other major German parties have implemented a “
firewall
” against working with the AfD due to its extremist links — eg, Germany’s domestic intelligence agency has placed part of the AfD under surveillance as an extremist and anti-constitutional group; and courts have twice fined an AfD state-level leader for using a Nazi slogan.
That might explain some of the local shock after Elon Musk endorsed the AfD and the US VP met Weidel during last week’s visit to Munich (while snubbing Germany’s current leader).
Notable quote:
“We have friends in the West and the East"
Social Democrats (SPD), polling at 16%
Olaf Scholz
is Germany’s current chancellor and the face of his party but, if polls are to be believed, not for much longer. He favours:
Easing the debt brake, plus gradual economic reforms
Reforms to immigration laws (without alienating his more centre-left base), and
A continuation of his steadfast-yet-cautious support for Ukraine.
He’s the incumbent at a tough time, who’s copped criticism for being too hesitant and risk-averse while trying to hold his unlikely ex-coalition together.
Notable quote
:
“We need to
win
confidence back”
Greens, polling at 13%
While you might’ve heard more about
Annalena Baerbock
(Germany’s foreign minister), it’s economy and environment minister
Robert Habeck
who’s the lead Greens candidate:
His party backs easing the debt brake
He’s open to immigration reforms without being anti-immigration, and
He supports continued aid to Ukraine (plus is wary of China’s authoritarianism).
Notable quote:
“I'm 55 years old and have lived in a country where security and prosperity seemed guaranteed”
As for the other smaller parties, polls suggest most will struggle to reach the 5% threshold to get a seat in the Bundestag. The strongest might be
The Left
party, which is enjoying a recent surge from young voters after a rising star went viral for dunking on the front-runner (Merz) when he accepted AfD votes on his immigration proposals.
So what’s gonna happen? Given the firewall against the AfD, most see Merz emerging atop a
grand coalition
as the most likely outcome this Sunday —
the exact make-up of any coalition will determine how decisive he can then be
in tackling Germany’s mounting political, economic, and geopolitical challenges.
INTRIGUE’S TAKE
It’s been a brutal final week in Germany as campaigns flood the airwaves and plaster every town — big and small — with posters per Kristen’s pic above. And speaking of photos, there was an incident outside an AfD campaign event this week as Intrigue tried to take a pic of loud counter-protests while AfD folks angled to get inside — an AfD supporter snapped, warning that they didn’t want to be pictured at the event.
It was all a reminder not only of the tension in the air, but also the difficulty in measuring support for a party like the AfD. And JD Vance’s decision to meet the AfD’s leader (but not Scholz) a week before election day might’ve nudged things either way:
Perhaps it removed stigma around supporting the AfD, and/or
Maybe it just fuelled irritation at US interference.
We’ll get an answer from Sunday.
Also worth noting:
A single party needs to win more than 50% of the seats to rule outright, something that’s never happened in recent history. Given Germany’s challenges, there’s real public (and broader European) pressure to finalise the inevitable post-election coalition-forming process asap.
MEANWHILE, ELSEWHERE…
🇲🇽
Mexico
: The Mexican army says it’s arrested ‘El Güerito’ (little blondie), top advisor and
security chief to a core leader of the Sinaloa Cartel
(who’s also a son of the infamous jailed ‘El Chapo’). The Sinaloa Cartel is now one of eight regional crime groups included on the US list of foreign terrorist organisations.
🇦🇿
Azerbaijan
: Baku has suspended the local BBC operations providing news
coverage in the Azerbaijani language
to a million people each week. The government has only communicated the order to BBC verbally, and hasn’t yet responded to requests for clarification.
🇿🇦
South Africa
: President Cyril Ramaphosa has opened
the latest summit of G20 foreign ministers
, warning of an “
already fragile global coexistence
” and a “
lack of consensus among major powers
” on how to respond. The US has sent its deputy-ambassador rather than Marco Rubio, and Treasury Secretary Bessent will likewise skip next week’s meeting of G20 finance ministers.
🇮🇳
India
: Japan’s Suzuki Motors has announced it’ll invest another $8B in India over the next six years to
expand its local production by a third
. The firm, investing in India since the 80s (great decade btw), expects 60% of its expanded sales to be in India, with the remainder destined across Africa and the Middle East.
🇻🇳
Vietnam
: The country’s rubber-stamp parliament has approved China-based loans to finance
a new $8.3B rail link between the two neighbours
. It’s one of two rail lines to China that Vietnam is planning under its ‘
Two Corridors, One Belt
’ initiative, connecting to China’s flagship ‘
Belt & Road
’ infrastructure program.
FROM OUR SPONSORS
Pets Are Cute. Expensive Vet Bills Aren’t.
Our pet’s curiosity is adorable—until it gets them into trouble. Whether it’s sneaking a taste of something they shouldn’t or testing their daredevil skills, life with pets is full of unexpected twists that can turn into thousands in vet bills. Pet insurance covers the costs of eligible accidents, illnesses, and even routine care for as little as $10 a month. And with some plans offering up to 90% reimbursement, it can keep everyone’s tail wagging. Check out Money’s top pet insurance picks to find a plan today.
VIEW PLANS.
EXTRA INTRIGUE
Intrigue’s weekend recommendations
Listen to
FACE-OFF: US vs CHINA
,
a podcast from Pulitzer Prize-winner Jane Perlez
offering an inside look at the turbulent ties between the world's two superpowers (featuring an Intrigue shout-out!).
Watch
Bridget Jones: Mad About the Boy
,
the fourth film in the series
that just came out and has kept audiences laughing and crying with a heartfelt break from the news cycle.
And
read
Parting Shots
, a 2010 classic featuring the
final cables from British diplomats
abroad, from the 1950s to the 90s.
MEME OF THE DAY
From our resident meme-lord Jeremy (@Dickerpicss on Insta)
Cate Blanchett won an Oscar for her role in
Blue Jasmine
, but there’s a moment in the film when every diplomat in the audience audibly scoffs (at least we did?) at the sheer implausibility on screen: she meets a US diplomat (played by Peter Sarsgaard) who is somehow wealthy enough to own both a golden BMW and a sweet $7M bayfront estate in Paradise Cay. Believe us when we tell you: diplomat life usually looks very different.
Our own JD has carefully crafted the above meme to help explain some of the nuances.
FRIDAY QUIZ
It’s International Mother Language Day!
Which country came up with the idea to celebrate International Mother Language Day?
Bolivia
China
Estonia
Bangladesh
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Approximately how many languages are left in the world?
1509
8324
1977
10050
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Roughly how often do languages disappear?
Every decade
Every day
Every five years
Every two weeks
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Was this forwarded to you? We're a team of ex-diplomats producing a concise and engaging geopolitical briefing for 120k+ leaders each day.
It’s free to subscribe
.