URL: https://archives.internationalintrigue.io/p/cop31-g20-recap
Title: 🌍 Your COP and G20 twofer

Today’s briefing:
— Your COP and G20 twofer
— Something up in Venezuela?
— They’re accusing France of squatting!
Good morning {{first_name | Intriguer}}
. I periodically use this space to offer totally unsolicited ideas for smug things to slip into conversation, whether it’s jazz or French music.
Well today, dear Intriguer, I’m inviting you to go all-of-the-above and slip
French jazz
into the chat. But not just any French jazz, mind you. Paris label Hot Casa Records is releasing an intriguing new album by the Florian Pellissier Quintet next month, featuring the single
Où C'est? Qui sait?
(Where is it? Who knows?) that’s already streaming.
Then when the flight attendant asks why on Earth you’re talking about this, you counter that the song title seems as good a segue as any to today’s briefing on
all the progress coming out of this weekend’s G20 and COP summits
. Where is it? Who knows.
PS
— We’ll take a quick
Thanksgiving
break this Thursday and Friday, but will be back in your inbox from Monday!
Report of the day
Stabilizing the US-China Rivalry
We recently highlighted the debate around the above new RAND thinktank report, which argues (eg) that the US should settle for “
co-existence
” with China. Well intriguingly — and it’s unclear why — but RAND has now
withdrawn
that report for “
further review
”!
Your COP and G20 wrap-up
The hosts of the COP (Brazil’s Lula) and G20 (South Africa’s Ramaphosa)
We just had a rare geopolitical
Barbenheimer
, with two big yet distinct summits wrapping the same weekend (both boycotted by the US, btw).
Here are the top quotes you should know, starting with…
🇧🇷
The 30th COP climate summit, Belém
"
Trees can be worth more standing than cut down
" – Mohamed Irfaan Ali, president of Guyana
Ali here was highlighting one of the summit's clearer outcomes: a $125B '
Tropical Forests Forever Facility
' to pay certain nations for preserving their trees. With an initial ~$6B seeding from Norway and others, it's now up to the World Bank to get it running.
The other big COP outcome was…
"
Adaptation is not optional
" – Simon Stiell, the UN climate chief (pre-COP quote)
Wealthier countries pledged to
triple
their support
to help poorer players adapt to climate change: think more flood defences in Bangladesh, or sea-level barriers in Vanuatu.
Interestingly, this tripling was meant as a carrot to get the rest of the world to commit to burning fewer fossil fuels, but instead, the summit just yoinked that carrot and...
"
A climate decision that cannot even say ‘fossil fuels’ is not neutrality, it is complicity
" – Juan Carlos Monterrey Gómez, Panama’s COP representative
This COP was meant to hammer out the details of our pledge to
"
transition away
"
from fossil fuels, but petrostates like Saudi Arabia and Russia said no, so Brazil announced  Colombia’s voluntary
April summit
will take this forward outside the UN instead.
Now order some non-free-range eggs on that gas-guzzling Gulfstream over to...
🇿🇦
The 20th summit of G20 leaders, Johannesburg
"
We have what we call sufficient consensus
" – Vincent Magwenya, spokesperson for South Africa’s president
With the US boycotting and a DC-friendly Argentina withholding its own signature at the last minute,
there was no consensus
at this year's G20 summit in South Africa.
But South Africa’s Ramaphosa called their bluff and published
a G20 declaration
anyway. It’s like saying your family WhatsApp has “
sufficient consensus
” on Christmas plans, even though Uncle Gus and the cousins made clear they hate your Christmas plans.
Anyway, Ramaphosa’s point was clear: in a multipolar world, a US boycott might just end up curbing America's own influence. Meanwhile...
"
We will promote mutually beneficial cooperation and peaceful use of key minerals
" – Li Qiang, premier of China
Li (repping his boss Xi) copped a veiled G20 rebuke of China's "
unilateral trade actions
" that limit the world's access to
critical mineral bottlenecks
: those curbs have rattled not just US military and tech leaders, but also European and Japanese automakers.
So Li announced a low-detail "
global mining initiative
" with 19 developing nations promising "
stable and smooth
” supplies. Also hinting at mineral deals with Germany and others, it's a reminder China is still leveraging its bottlenecks to drive its own agenda.
That’s why America’s own Export-Import Bank (EXIM) is now reportedly
investing $100B
to secure US and allied supply chains. But there was a bigger focus at this year's G20...
“
We used this presidency to place the priorities of Africa and the Global South firmly at the heart of the G20 agenda
” – Cyril Ramaphosa, president of South Africa
You could see this both in the G20’s
guestlist
(with ~20 guests like Angola, Namibia, and Nigeria) but also the
focus
: the G20's first explicit prioritisation of
inequality reduction
.
It's mostly aspirational, though
the associated report
(led by Nobel laureate Joseph Stiglitz) includes some big
findings
(41% of recent new wealth went to the top 1%) and
recommendations
(tackle corporate concentration and large capital gains).
And with that, Ramaphosa banged the gavel, though there was a spat over how to hand it to next year’s US hosts (they've agreed to meet at South Africa's foreign ministry).
Intrigue’s Take
There was something grimly poetic about a gridlocked climate summit in the Amazon literally bursting into flames on Thursday. But here we are.
And
no offence to Swedes or teens
, but it’s also a reminder of how much our world has changed since the days when a Swedish teen could scold world leaders to attention.
To be clear, that’s not because the research has changed — to the contrary, it still warns that “
climate change is a threat to human well-being and planetary health
”.
The change is in the politics, and it’s playing out in the G20, too: a collapse in trust is eroding our world’s willingness and ability to adapt.
Sound even smarter:
The COP statement did include this line: "
the global transition towards low greenhouse gas emissions and climate-resilient development is irreversible and the trend of the future
".
Brazil dubbed its main COP outcome text ‘Mutirao', which roughly translates to collective mobilisation.
Meanwhile, elsewhere…
🇺🇦
UKRAINE — Peace plan concerns.
US and Ukrainian delegations huddled in Switzerland over the weekend to discuss the latest 28-point peace plan, whose precise origins are still murky. It’s likewise unclear if anyone’s proposing edits to the text, which in its original form would’ve been the perfect Christmas gift for President Putin. (
BBC
)
🇻🇳
VIETNAM — Deadly floods.
Major floods have left at least 90 people dead after torrential rains swept through central Vietnam. (
CNA
)
🇳🇬
NIGERIA — More school kidnappings.
More than 250 schoolchildren and 12 teachers are still missing after fifty kids managed to escape Friday’s mass armed kidnapping at a Catholic school in northern Nigeria. Nobody has yet claimed responsibility. (
CNN
)
🇮🇳
INDIA — Export woes.
One of India’s home-made Tejas fighter jets has crashed during a demonstration at the Dubai Air Show, killing the pilot. The cause remains unclear. (
Al Jazeera
)
Comment:
We
explored
the Dubai Air Show just last week, including the way capitals use it to boost their arms exports. Needless to say, crashing its wares on arguably the world’s biggest aviation stage won’t help India’s export ambitions.
🇧🇦
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA — Hand-picked.
Bosnian Serbs in the semi-autonomous Republika Srpska have elected another nationalist (Sinisa Karan) after a conviction ousted his predecessor for ignoring the international appointee tasked with overseeing Bosnia’s 1990s-era peace. (
Euractiv
)
Comment:
Few are saying this bit out loud, but the last guy seemingly only stepped down after the US offered to lift sanctions on him. Sometimes sanctions work?
🇮🇩
INDONESIA
— Resign!
The head of the world's largest Islamic organization (Indonesia’s 100-million member Nahdlatul Ulama) is rejecting calls for his resignation after he inadvertently invited a pro-Israel Stanford scholar (and Trump’s former State director of policy planning) to an internal training session. (
Jakarta Globe
)
🇻🇪
VENEZUELA — Stand still.
Multiple international airlines have cancelled flights to Venezuela after US aviation authorities cryptically warned of a "
worsening security situation and heightened military activity
". (
AP
)
Comment
: Again, time will tell whether this is just the White House destabilising Maduro’s grip on power, or if something might actually happen.
🇱🇧
LEBANON — City center.
The Israeli military says it killed Hezbollah’s top military official in Beirut's southern suburbs on Sunday, with local sources reporting the attack left five dead and wounded more than two dozen. (
Al-Monitor
)
Extra Intrigue
🤣
Your weekly roundup of the world’s lighter news
A prisoner Down Under is
suing for his human right to eat Vegemite
.
A China-based firm has somehow bought the
CIA’s insurance agency
.
A ferry has run aground in South Korea because the
captain was on his phone
.
US rapper Eminem is
suing an Australian beach umbrella brand
called
Swim Shady
.
And a British grocery store is
defending pricing a beef wellington
at ~$255.
Embassy of the day
Credits: @FranceinIraq, Instagram
Paris has plenty of financial headaches at the moment but one the Élysée probably didn’t expect landing on its desk is a half century old property dispute out of Baghdad.
The descendants of the former owners of the French embassy building in Iraq are now demanding €21.5M in back rent and moral damages, effectively accusing Paris of squatting! France is reportedly countering that it was Iraq’s own Ba'athist laws that seized the family’s property, but the family is in turn highlighting that these particular laws specifically persecuted them and others as Jewish emigres.
The case is now bouncing between the courts, Baghdad, and Paris, with no end in sight.
Today’s poll
If you could poach one world leader for your own government, who would you choose and why?
(assuming full loyalty!)
🇨🇳 Xi Jinping
🇮🇳 Narendra Modi
🇲🇽 Claudia Sheinbaum
🇪🇺 Ursula von der Leyen
🇹🇷 Recep Tayyip Erdoğan
✍️ Other (write in!)
Login
or
Subscribe
to participate
Last Thursday’s poll:
What do you think this US 28-point plan for Ukraine is?
🧍
A Witkoff original (25%)
🖋️
A high-ball to make Ukraine more flexible (36%)
👊
A fait accompli Trump will impose on Ukraine (33%)
✍️ Other (write in!) (6%)
Your two cents:
🖋️
F.G:
“I think it also helps get Putin to the table, since he has been so reluctant to negotiate in good faith.”
👊
T.S:
“Flexibility is a code word for total Ukrainian surrender.”
✍️ E.K.M:
“What it means for Russia and Ukraine doesn't matter. It's throwing anything and everything at the wall to let Trump claim he's a peacemaker to his domestic audience.”